4/2021 Making waves – Fed spillovers are stronger and more encompassing than the ECB’s
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210415~8639b73bb6.en.html 1/6
15 APRIL 2021 · RESEARCH BULLETIN NO. 83
Making waves – Fed spillovers are stronger
and more encompassing than the ECB’s
By , , , , and
[ ]
This article argues that European Central Bank (ECB) and Federal Reserve System (Fed) monetary
policy spill over to other countries asymmetrically. At the bilateral level, the Fed’s impact on the euro
area is material to firms’ financial conditions and economic activity. Conversely, the impact of the
ECB’s actions on the US economy is minimal. On a global scale, both central banks’ monetary policies
matter for other countries, but the Fed’s monetary policy has a more sizeable impact, particularly on
foreign financial variables, such as corporate bond spreads.
Monetary policy in a globalised world
International trade and financial globalisation have made economies more interdependent and more
exposed to each other’s domestic shocks. Economic theory suggests that globalisation affects the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy and that its spillovers could strengthen the international
dimension of monetary policy.[ ] When monetary policy actions spill over abroad, this might at times
complement policy choices in other countries and thus be a welcome externality. But at other times
this might confront these countries with unfavourable policy choices. For example, they may find it
harder to reconcile macroeconomic and financial stability without resorting to an enlarged set of policy
tools. Only by exploring data can we shine a light on the extent to which monetary policy has acquired
a global dimension.
Comparing spillovers originating from different central banks based on previous research is difficult. In
past approaches, the estimation methodology, identification approach and sample period have differed
widely. In what follows we summarise the findings of our recent paper (Ca’ Zorzi et. al, 2020), where
we carefully disentangle the effects of ECB and Fed monetary policy. We compare the impact of each
central bank’s monetary policy – both on the other’s economy and worldwide – using a unified and
consistent methodological framework.
Identifying international spillovers
Spillovers are a potential side effect of monetary policy. Our identification approach disentangles the
exogenous or “surprise” variation in monetary policy from the systematic response of monetary policy
to economic developments, such as the latest inflation readings. During a sufficiently narrow time
window around monetary policy announcements it is unlikely that events or news besides the policy
announcement drive financial markets. The movement in interest rates during this short period
therefore represents an exogenous effect of the monetary policy announcement – a surprise,
unanticipated by financial markets given all available information, including the most recent economic
developments. Additionally, our identification separates such exogenous monetary policy shocks from
what the literature refers to as “central bank information” shocks.[ ]
We estimate the impact of ECB and Fed monetary policy based on Bayesian vector-autoregression
(BVAR) models for the years 1999 to 2018.[ ] Our estimates represent the average effects of monetary
policy over this period. Therefore, they encompass the effects of both conventional policies (e.g.
setting interest rates) and unconventional policies (e.g. adding purchase programmes or broadening
the range of eligible collateral).[ ]
Michele Ca’ Zorzi Luca Dedola Georgios Georgiadis Marek Jarociński Livio Stracca
Georg Strasser 1
2
3
4
5
4/2021 Making waves – Fed spillovers are stronger and more encompassing than the ECB’s
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210415~8639b73bb6.en.html 2/6
Bilateral spillovers between the euro area and the United States
Even in a highly globalised world, both ECB and Fed monetary policies have a sizeable impact on
domestic financial conditions, real activity and inflation. Surprise monetary policy tightening by either
the ECB or the Fed raises domestic government and corporate bond yields, depresses domestic
equity markets, and triggers an appreciation of the domestic currency as well as a fall in inflation and
real activity. In Chart 1, below, the dotted lines show this strong effect on domestic real activity,
measured here by industrial production.
The solid line with the blue confidence band in the right-hand panel highlights the impact of US
monetary on the euro area: a Fed tightening leads to a reduction of euro area industrial production.
Conversely, the impact of ECB monetary policy on the US economy in the left-hand panel is
insignificant. There are two possible explanations: either the Fed has been able and quite determined
to fully offset spillovers from ECB monetary policy; or, alternatively, the ECB’s monetary policy did not
give rise to significant spillovers in the first place.
Chart 1
Bilateral spillovers from a monetary policy tightening to real activity
Industrial production
(100 x log)
Notes: The left-hand panel shows the impulse response to an ECB tightening, and the right-hand panel the
response to a Federal Reserve tightening, each over a period of 36 months. Quantities for the United States are
plotted in red, quantities for the euro area in blue. The dotted lines show the response of domestic industrial
production, with diamonds symbolising significance at the one-standard deviation level. The solid line shows the
median impulse response of the corresponding spillover with a one-standard-deviation band. Sources: SDW,
FRED.
4/2021 Making waves – Fed spillovers are stronger and more encompassing than the ECB’s
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210415~8639b73bb6.en.html 3/6
By contrast, Fed monetary policy spillovers to the euro area are much larger. They significantly affect
euro area financial conditions, especially corporate bond rates (Chart 2). This suggests that financial
channels play a prominent role in Fed spillovers to the euro area.
Global effects of ECB and Fed monetary policy
This asymmetry between the ECB and Fed monetary policy goes beyond the bilateral transatlantic
spillovers. It is evident also in their cross-border impact on emerging market economies (EMEs).
Consistent with the dominant role of the US dollar in the international monetary system, Fed monetary
policy elicits large spillovers to both financial conditions and real activity in EMEs (Chart 3). By
contrast, spillovers from ECB monetary policy are largely confined to trade.[ ] Unlike the bilateral
spillovers between the euro area and the United States, our findings suggest that ECB and Fed
monetary policy actions may give rise to policy trade-offs in EMEs if the policy cycles are not in sync.
Chart 2
Bilateral financial spillovers from a monetary policy tightening
Corporate bond spreads
(below investment grade, all maturities, percentage points)
Notes: The left-hand panel shows the impulse response to an ECB tightening, and the right-hand panel the
response to a Federal Reserve tightening, each over a period of 36 months. Quantities for the United States are
plotted in red, quantities for the euro area in blue. The dotted lines show the response of domestic corporate bond
spreads, with diamonds symbolising significance at the one-standard-deviation level. The solid line shows the
median impulse response of the corresponding spillover with a one-standard-deviation band. The corporate bond
spread is the option-adjusted spread between a corporate bond with a BBB or below investment grade rating and
a government bond. Source: FRED.
6
4/2021 Making waves – Fed spillovers are stronger and more encompassing than the ECB’s
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210415~8639b73bb6.en.html 4/6
Our findings suggest a key role for financial channels as a conduit of US monetary policy spillovers,
especially towards EMEs. Fed monetary policy actions can have major implications for global financial
markets (Chart 4). Both the central role of US financial markets and the dominant role of the US dollar
amplify the global effects of Fed monetary policy.
Chart 3
Effects of a monetary policy tightening on EMEs
Real GDP of EMEs
(USD, 100 x log)
Notes: The solid line shows the median impulse response surrounded by a one-standard-deviation band over a
period of 36 months. In the left-hand panel are the responses to an ECB tightening, in the right-hand panel the
responses to a Fed tightening. GDP is shown measured at prices and exchange rates in 2010, seasonally
adjusted, in US dollars, based on a cubic spline interpolation from quarterly data, including the countries: Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Russia, Singapore, South
Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Uruguay. Sources: Haver Analytics, ECB calculations.
4/2021 Making waves – Fed spillovers are stronger and more encompassing than the ECB’s
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210415~8639b73bb6.en.html 5/6
Dealing with foreign spillovers
Unlike the limited bilateral spillovers between the euro area and the United States, the spillovers to the
rest of the world suggest that both ECB and Fed monetary policy actions are relevant for the policy
choices of EMEs. In periods of unfavourable spillovers, EME policy trade-offs could arise as a result of
more widespread and more pronounced frictions in local financial and product markets, for example
due to a less developed local banking sector or rigidly regulated industries. Our empirical perspective
does not rule out possible gains from monetary policy co-ordination between advanced and emerging
economies. But it might also be possible to mitigate trade-offs locally, for example by assigning a
greater role to macroprudential policies, such as regulating the leverage in the financial system (Rey
2016). This might help EME policymakers to preserve financial stability without compromising their
intended monetary policy targets.
References
Ca' Zorzi, M., Dedola, L., Georgiadis, G., Jarociński, M., Stracca, L. and Strasser, G. (2020),
"Monetary policy and its transmission in a globalised world", Discussion Papers, 
, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, May.
Dedola, L., Rivolta, G. and Stracca, L. (2017), “If the Fed sneezes, who catches a cold?”, Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 108, Supplement 1, pp. S23-S41.
Gerko, E. and Rey, H. (2017), “Monetary policy in the capitals of capital”, Journal of the European
Economic Association, Vol. 15 No 4, pp. 721-745.
Iacoviello, M. and Navarro, G. (2019), “Foreign effects of higher U.S. interest rates”, Journal of
International Money and Finance, Vol. 95(C), pp. 232-250.
Jarociński, M. and Karadi, P. (2020), “Deconstructing monetary policy surprises – the role of
information shocks”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 12, No 2, pp. 1-43.
Chart 4
Effects of a monetary policy tightening on global financial markets
Syndicated loans outside denomination currency area
(new loan issue volume, 100 x log)
Notes: The solid line shows the median impulse response surrounded by a one-standard-deviation band over a
period of 36 months. In the left-hand panel these are the responses to an ECB tightening, in the right-hand panel
the responses to a Fed tightening. Sources: Dealogic, ECB calculations.
ECB Working Paper
Series, No 2407
4/2021 Making waves – Fed spillovers are stronger and more encompassing than the ECB’s
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210415~8639b73bb6.en.html 6/6
Copyright 2021, European Central Bank
Melosi, L. (2017), “Signalling effects of monetary policy”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 84, No 2,
pp. 853-884.
Nakamura, E. and Steinsson, J. (2018), “High-frequency identification of monetary non-neutrality: The
information effect”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 133, No 3, pp. 1283-1330.
Rey, H. (2016), “International channels of transmission of monetary policy and the Mundellian
trilemma”, IMF Economic Review, Vol. 64, No 1, pp. 6-35.
1. This article was written by Michele Ca’ Zorzi, Georgios Georgiadis and Livio Stracca (all Directorate
General International and European Relations, ECB) and Luca Dedola, Marek Jarociński and Georg
Strasser (all Directorate General Research, ECB). The authors gratefully acknowledge comments from
Michael Ehrmann, Alexander Popov and Zoë Sprokel. The views expressed here are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the ECB.
2. See,for example, Dedola et al. (2017), Gerko and Rey (2017), or Iacoviello and Navarro (2019).
3. These are fluctuations in interest rates which reflect changes in the perceived central bank
assessment of the economic outlook (see Melosi, 2017; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018; Jarociński
and Karadi 2020). Such shocks have been shown to play a role in driving the business cycle.
4. The estimation approach and technical details are described in Ca’ Zorzi et. al. (2020).
5. Estimates for shorter periods, such as the period of the expanded asset purchase programme,
would not be reliable with the methodology used. Using longer-term swaps for recent years to try to
better capture the effect of unconventional monetary policy does not change the results.
6. Impulse responses for trade and other variables can be found in Ca’ Zorzi et. al. (2020). 