9/21 Side effects of monetary easing in a low interest rate environment: reversal and risk-taking
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210921_1~990bfeaab7.en.html 1/8
22 September 2021 · RESEARCH BULLETIN NO. 87.2
Side effects of monetary easing in a low
interest rate environment: reversal and risktaking
By and [ ]
The effect of policy rate cuts on bank lending and risk-taking depends on how the low interest rate
environment affects banks’ ability to raise external financing. When interest rates are low, easing
monetary policy relaxes banks’ external financing constraint less than when interest rates are high. This
reduces the stimulus to bank lending and induces banks to take more risk. There are indeed side effects
of monetary stimulus at the zero-lower bound (ZLB).
Monetary policy in a low or negative interest rate environment
Since 2014, the European Central Bank (ECB) and other central banks have been pursuing a negative
interest rate policy (NIRP). The ECB has reduced its deposit facility rate step by step from 0% to -0.50%.
The NIRP has spurred an intense debate among both policymakers and academics about its benefits and
potential drawbacks.
The concerns about low and negative rates are that they may be less effective at stimulating lending,
while also stimulating bank risk-taking. The controversy about monetary policy in a low rate environment
hinges on the existence of a zero-lower bound (ZLB) on interest rates (Coibion et al., 2012). In particular,
there is a ZLB on most deposit rates: banks are reluctant to pass negative rates onto their depositors,
especially households (Figure 1).[ ]
Florian Heider Agnese Leonello 1
2
9/21 Side effects of monetary easing in a low interest rate environment: reversal and risk-taking
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210921_1~990bfeaab7.en.html 2/8
In a low or negative interest rate environment, it becomes harder for banks to pass on the reduction in the
policy rate to their depositors. This means a policy rate cut translates into a lower interest rate margin and
reduces the net worth of banks. This reduction in bank net worth leads to a contraction in lending as
banks attempt to avoid violating regulatory constraints (Brunnermeier and Koby, 2018; Ulate, 2021). In
addition, a policy rate cut may also induce banks to lower their underwriting standards (Dell’ Ariccia et al.,
2014) and to engage in ''search for yield'' behaviour (Martinez-Miera and Repullo, 2017).
In our recent paper (Heider and Leonello, 2021), we present a simple conceptual framework to show how
a policy rate cut affects both bank lending and risk-taking in a low or negative interest rate environment
versus a high interest rate environment.
Conceptual framework
Our analysis is based on a partial-equilibrium model. Banks attract deposits from outside investors and
provide loans to firms (Figure 2). As an alternative to issuing loans, banks can invest in bonds. Similarly,
investors can either invest in bonds or hold cash instead of depositing it with a bank. Allowing investors to
hold cash also introduces a hard ZLB on retail deposit rates. The substitutability between loans, deposits
and bonds is the channel through which the policy rate affects loan and deposit rates.
Figure 1
Hard ZLB on overnight household deposit rates
Notes: The data are from the ECB’s datasets on individual MFI Interest Rates (iMIR) and individual Balance Sheet
Items (iBSI). The m1 indicates the first month of a year (e.g., 2012m1 stands for January 1, 2012).
9/21 Side effects of monetary easing in a low interest rate environment: reversal and risk-taking
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210921_1~990bfeaab7.en.html 3/8
The conceptual framework is centred on an external financing constraint faced by banks as is common in
models of the macroeconomy that feature financial frictions.[ ]
 Following Holmström and Tirole (1997), the
constraint hinges on the banks having incentives not to monitor loans already granted. Loans are risky.
They need to be monitored ex post, i.e. after being granted, to reduce the probability of the borrower
defaulting. Ex post monitoring is also necessary because depositors would not entrust their funds to the
bank otherwise. But it is costly and unobservable to outsiders, so banks with limited liability accrue a
private benefit from shirking on monitoring. This implies that only a fraction of the loan return (the
“pledgeable return”) can be paid to outside investors as banks need to earn a rent that compensates them
for costly monitoring. In order to maximise funding from depositors, banks contribute equity of their own,
as this “skin in the game” is a credible signal that the banks’ borrowers are creditworthy.[ ]
To analyse bank risk-taking, we add an ex ante screening problem to the ex post monitoring problem. By
investing time and money in screening borrowers carefully ex ante, i.e. before lending to them, banks can
select better borrowers and increase the probability of loans being repaid. Banks therefore take more
risks when they reduce their screening effort. Outside investors are in fact willing to invest in banks that
screen less, if they receive a higher return on their investment.
Reversal and risk-taking
In our framework, a policy rate cut affects bank lending through the external financing constraint. This
characterises how much credit banks can supply given their equity. Its exact measure, i.e. bank leverage,
is determined by an “equity multiplier”, which depends directly on deposit and loan rates. A reduction in
the deposit rate increases the equity multiplier, thus allowing banks to expand credit. By contrast, a lower
loan rate translates into a lower pledgeable return, thus decreasing the equity multiplier and making it
more difficult for banks to raise external funds.
Reversal occurs when a cut in the monetary policy rate reduces lending instead of increasing it
(Brunnermeier and Koby, 2018). Reversal happens when the positive effect of a rate cut on lending via
lower deposit rates is weak compared to the negative effect via lower loan rates (Figure 3).
The reversal rate hinges on the existence of a ZLB on retail deposit rates. This weakens the pass-through
of a lower policy rate to the cost of funding for banks so that, when rates are low, it is weaker than the
pass-through to loan rates.[ ]
Figure 2
The economy
Notes: The different variables (e.g. the deposit rate or loan return R(L) refer to the model in Heider and Leonello,
2021).
rD
3
4
5
9/21 Side effects of monetary easing in a low interest rate environment: reversal and risk-taking
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210921_1~990bfeaab7.en.html 4/8
Reversal is related to – but not directly triggered by – reduced profits from a contraction in the net interest
margin at the ZLB. This argument, which is often found in existing discussions, does not take into account
the fact that the net interest margin is split into a “non-pledgeable” rent retained by the bank and a
pledgeable part transferred to outside investors. The net interest margin therefore overstates the benefit
from lending: in certain situations, bank profits – and, in turn, lending – decrease with the policy rate, even
though the net interest margin still increases (Figure 4).
Figure 3
At low policy rates, further cuts stimulate lending less and may eventually reduce
lending (reversal)
Notes: The figure illustrates how bank lending, denoted with L* changes with the policy rate . The level of the policy
rate at which lending is maximal identifies the reversal rate.
rP
9/21 Side effects of monetary easing in a low interest rate environment: reversal and risk-taking
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210921_1~990bfeaab7.en.html 5/8
How exactly does monetary policy influence banks’ risk-taking?[ ]
 Banks take more risk when the cost of
prudent behaviour, e.g. costly screening, outweighs the benefit.[ ]
 The benefit of prudent behaviour is
captured by the ability to lend and earn the rent for intermediating. Prudent banks can attract more
outside financing, leverage up more and accrue more profits. Therefore, monetary policy affects risktaking through its effect on the lending volume.
When a policy rate cut makes it more difficult to expand lending, banks find it less attractive to screen
borrowers. This implies that when the policy rate falls below the reversal rate, a policy rate cut leads to
increased risk-taking. However, monetary policy may also induce increased risk-taking above the reversal
rate (Figure 5). This occurs when banks have market power. With market power, an increase in the
lending volume reduces the loan rate, which then further reduces the benefit from screening.
Figure 4
When the policy rate falls, bank profits can decrease even if the net interest margin still
increases
Note: The blue line represents bank profits, while the purple line shows the net interest rate margin. In the interval
between the blue dashed line and the yellow dashed line, a lower policy rate reduces bank profits but still increases
the net interest margin.
6
7
9/21 Side effects of monetary easing in a low interest rate environment: reversal and risk-taking
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210921_1~990bfeaab7.en.html 6/8
Conclusion: central banks and banking supervisors should exercise
caution
Our research suggests that there are potential side effects of monetary stimulus in a low interest rate
environment: reduced lending and increased risk-taking by banks. As a result, it is important for central
banks to take financial stability considerations into account when deciding on monetary policy, since there
may be conflicts in the long run between price stability and financial stability. Moreover, our modelling
framework suggests that the competitive nature of lending and deposit markets needs to be taken into
account when assessing these trade-offs.