What did forecasters learn during the European
sovereign debt crisis about the impact of fiscal
policies on economic growth?
5 September 2018
By Lucyna Górnicka,  Christophe Kamps,  Gerrit Koester and  Nadine Leiner-Killinger[1]
Economists often try to forecast whether the economy as a whole will grow or contract. When measuring the effects of
fiscal policy measures on economic activity, such forecasts are based on so-called multipliers. Using a new dataset
compiled from economic forecasts and recommendations by the European Commission under the excessive deficit
procedure of the Stability and Growth Pact, we derive the multipliers that were assumed by forecasters during the
European sovereign debt crisis to project the effects of fiscal consolidation on economic growth. Our results confirm that
forecasters adapted their assumptions on multipliers as the crisis progressed and accounted for larger effects of
consolidation on growth later on in the crisis. Another finding is that the actual fiscal multipliers were not exceptionally
large during the crisis.
As is well known, from 2008 the euro area was faced with a financial crisis, and national government debts increased to
often unprecedented levels. In order to deal with this crisis-induced increase in debt, as of 2010 many euro area
countries embarked on a process known as fiscal retrenchment, i.e. raising taxes and/or cutting public services. The
crisis reignited a controversial debate on the impact of fiscal policies –the use of taxes and government spending to
influence the overall economy – on economic growth. The fact that the impact of fiscal policies on growth is not directly
observable but has to be estimated lies at the heart of this debate. Forecasters usually try to estimate the effects of fiscal
measures on growth using the so-called fiscal multiplier. This measures the effect of a €1 change in government
spending or a €1 change in taxes on economic activity as measured by GDP.
At the height of the sovereign debt crisis in 2011 and 2012, GDP growth was much lower than forecasters had expected
– especially in the countries worst hit by the crisis. In an influential contribution to the policy debate at the time, two
economists, Olivier Blanchard and Daniel Leigh, argued that the forecast errors came about largely because forecasters
had underestimated the feedback effects of fiscal consolidation on economic growth – in other words, forecasters
underestimated fiscal multipliers.[2] At the same time, Blanchard and Leigh (2013, 2014) found that the underestimation
of these negative feedback effects declined in the later years of the crisis. They conjectured that this reflected at least in
part the lessons learned by forecasters in the course of the crisis about the size of fiscal multipliers.
In a recent paper of our own, we test this hypothesis. We identify the fiscal multipliers used by forecasters at the
European Commission during the sovereign debt crisis between 2009 and 2015 and investigate their role in explaining
forecast errors during consolidation episodes. We find that the forecasters did indeed adjust their assumptions about the
impact of fiscal retrenchment on growth to incorporate a larger negative impact as the crisis progressed.
A new dataset
One of the strengths of our paper — and one of its advantages over the papers by Blanchard and Leigh —is its use of a
new dataset. Our dataset is new in that it combines the two forecast scenarios published by the European Commission
when conducting its surveillance of fiscal policies in the European Union (EU): the regular forecasts and the forecasts
made under the excessive deficit procedure (EDP). In the regular Commission forecasts, the economic outlook is based
on the assumption that no fiscal consolidation measures will be undertaken beyond those already legislated for. In the
forecasts under the EDP, the Commission specifies the size of the additional fiscal consolidation that would be
recommended to reduce an excessive deficit to below the 3% of GDP threshold by a certain year.[3] We then compare
the two forecasts. With a limited number of assumptions, it is possible to calculate the fiscal multipliers for

9/2018 What did forecasters learn during the European sovereign debt crisis about the im...

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb180905.en.html 2/3
individual countries and years as applied by the forecasters at the European Commission. It transpires that all EU
Member States except Estonia, Luxembourg and Sweden were under the EDP at the height of the sovereign debt
crisis. For this reason, we could derive the fiscal multipliers as actually applied by the European Commission for
almost all EU Member States in the period 2009-15.
Learning effects
What do our results show? They show that forecasters definitely learned from the crisis. This can be seen from the
increases they made to the fiscal multipliers used in the European Commission’s recommendations. By how much did
their multipliers increase? In the early years of the crisis, between 2009 and 2011, the recommendations were based
on assumptions of a fiscal multiplier of around 1/4 on average, that is, below what forecasters often consider to be the
“standard” value of 1/2. By contrast, later on in the crisis, between 2012 and 2015, most forecasts under the EDP
were based on fiscal multiplier assumptions that were much higher than this level at around 2/3. As shown in Chart 1,
18 EDP forecasts issued in the second half of 2009 are based on an ex ante implicit fiscal multiplier of around 0.1.
The five EDP forecasts issued in the first half of 2010 are based, on average, on an even lower implicit fiscal multiplier
of close to 0. These low implicit fiscal multipliers reflect the implicit assumption at the beginning of the crisis that fiscal
retrenchment would have only very limited negative effects on growth – if any. In fact, given that the private sector
was concerned about the state of public finances in the light of soaring deficit and debt levels, fiscal tightening was
expected by some to raise confidence and ultimately growth.[4] As the crisis continued, however, it became obvious
that fiscal adjustment had had a more negative impact on growth in the early years of the crisis than anticipated.
Therefore, it is likely that the broad-based rise in implicit fiscal multipliers during the later years of the crisis reflects
the fact that, as previously posited by Blanchard and Leigh, forecasters did indeed learn as the crisis progressed.
Chart 1: Ex ante fiscal multipliers in EDP recommendations issued by the ECOFIN Council between 2009 and
2015 (number of EDP recommendations indicated above columns)

Note: EDP recommendations issued by the ECOFIN Council. The y-axis reflects the average size of the fiscal
multiplier across all the EDP recommendations issued. For the second half of 2010, the average multiplier excludes
the outlier, Finland, for which the EDP is based on an implicit multiplier of close to 2. No new EDP recommendations
were issued in 2011. The data is depicted on a half-yearly basis for the early years of the crisis (from the first half of
2009 to the second half of 2011) to reflect the fact that recommendations under the EDP were issued throughout the
year, which was not always the case in the later years under consideration.
Source: European Commission, own calculations.
Implications for the estimation of “true” ex post fiscal multipliers
What can these findings tell us about the – unobservable – “true” ex post fiscal multipliers, that is, the actual impact
that fiscal retrenchment had on growth during the sovereign debt crisis? To infer something

9/2018 What did forecasters learn during the European sovereign debt crisis about the im...

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb180905.en.html 3/3
[1] Disclaimer: This article was written by Lucyna Gόrnicka (Economist, International Monetary Fund), Christophe Kamps (Head of Division, Directorate General Economic Developments, European Central Bank), Gerrit Koester (Principal Economist, Directorate General Economic Developments, European Central Bank) and Nadine Leiner-Killinger (Principal Economist, Directorate General Economic Developments, European Central Bank). It is based on a paper entitled “Learning about fiscal multipliers during the European
sovereign debt crisis – evidence from a quasi-natural experiment” by L. Gόrnicka, C. Kamps, G. Koester and N. Leiner-Killinger. The
authors gratefully acknowledge the comments of Jacopo Cimadomo, Paul Dudenhefer, Geoff Kenny, Sander Tordoir and Leopold von
Thadden. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the European Central Bank
and the Eurosystem.
[2] Blanchard and Leigh’s findings first appeared in 2013 in a short paper in the American Economic Review, one of the top journals in
the field of economics. An expanded version of the paper was published in the IMF Economic Review in 2014. In the short paper, Blanchard and Leigh conducted their analysis primarily for the IMF forecasts. They also reported results for other forecasters, including
the European Commission.
[3] The EDP scenario does not prescribe to what extent the recommended consolidation effort is to be distributed across government
expenditure and revenue measures.
[4] This was the conclusion of a study published in 2010 by Alberto Alesina and Silvia Ardagna.

European Central Bank
Directorate General Communications
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, Email: media@ecb.europa.eu Website: www.ecb.europa.eu
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
Media contacts
about the “true” ex post fiscal multipliers, Blanchard and Leigh start from two hypotheses: first, fiscal forecasters
applied a “standard” fiscal multiplier of 0.5 in their projections; and, second, lower than initially projected growth
indicates the extent to which this “standard” fiscal multiplier underestimated the actual impact of governments’ fiscal
consolidation plans on growth. They conclude for a country sample broadly comparable to ours and across forecasts by
different international institutions that multipliers were markedly above 1, implying that each euro of fiscal consolidation
reduced output by more than this amount.
Does our analysis of information contained in the EDP recommendations support these findings that the “true” ex post
fiscal multipliers are higher than expected? Not quite. We find that the “true” ex post multiplier remained below 1 at the
height of the crisis. As argued by Blanchard and Leigh, our analysis shows that the impact of fiscal retrenchment on
growth was indeed larger than initially assumed by forecasters. But we show that their initial assumption at the time
was not what experts consider “standard”, but markedly below that. These very optimistic beliefs regarding the limited
impact of consolidation on growth indeed imply that their “true” impact was larger, but not by as much as Blanchard and
Leigh posit.
Our analysis benefited from the European Commission’s increased transparency regarding the fiscal policy
recommendations that are issued to EU Member States under the EDP. More transparency regarding the applied fiscal
multipliers would generally enhance the impact of forecasting by international institutions and thus, ultimately, improve
policy-making.