How does sluggish updating of information affect
consumer spending?
By Jiri Slacalek[1]
Many economic models assume that households have up-to-date information. Here, we relax this
assumption and see how that affects consumption at the household and aggregate level. To be specific,
our model assumes that households only occasionally update their information about macroeconomic
quantities. What’s unique about our model is that it can reconcile the very low persistence of consumption
growth seen at the household level with it being substantially persistent at the aggregate level. In short, our
model better fits micro and macro data. Concerning fiscal policy, our model can explain the fact that
consumption reacts little to the announcement of a fiscal stimulus but substantially to the actual receipt of
a stimulus payment.
Imperfect updating of information
Many economic models assume that households use all available information in making decisions. In other
words, households in such models are assumed to have up-to-date information and rational expectations.
But some economists believe that these assumptions are too extreme. As evidence, they point to the fact
that models that make these assumptions have trouble explaining the behaviour of economic variables as

observed in the data. So what would happen if we relaxed the assumption that households have up-to-
date information? Would our models then better explain the behaviour of economic variables?

In a recent ECB working paper, we do exactly that, focusing on changes in consumption at the household
and aggregate level. In our model, as in the standard up-to-date information rational expectations model,
consumers perfectly (i.e. “frictionlessly”) perceive their own personal circumstances (employment status,
wage rate, wealth, etc.). However, in contrast to conventional models that feature rational expectations,
information about macroeconomic quantities (e.g. aggregate productivity growth) only arrives occasionally,
rather than being tracked continuously in time. Because of this, households' macroeconomic expectations
are “sticky”, in the sense that they adjust slowly to news about aggregate variables.
This assumption is in line with both the casual observation that households do not have perfect knowledge
about the value of economic aggregates (such as aggregate productivity growth or inflation) and studies
documenting the fact that household expectations react only sluggishly to new information. In addition, the
assumption is reasonable. In fact, as we show in the working paper, occasional updating of aggregate
quantities has little effect on households’ welfare. Compared to the variation in household-level variables,
the variation in aggregate variables is negligible, so that it is not essential for consumers to track it
precisely.
Sticky expectations and consumption dynamics
As we show in our working paper, our modified model can reconcile two important empirical facts about
consumption growth in household-level data and in aggregate data (see Chart 1). First, at the household
level, consumption growth exhibits very little persistence (and formally is close to a “white noise” process,
in line with the random walk hypothesis of Hall, 1978; see the grey bars in Chart 1). Second, in contrast, at
the aggregate level consumption growth is substantially persistent, so that strong current growth predicts

12/2019 How does sluggish updating of information affect consumer spending?

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2019/html/
ecb.rb191204~8873a505ff.en.html

2/5

strong growth next year. Formally, the autocorrelation of aggregate consumption growth is around 0.6 or
more (see the dark blue bars in Chart 1).
Chart 1
Distribution of estimates of persistence of consumption growth in macro and micro studies

Note: Reproduced from Havranek, Rusnak, and Sokolova (2017), Figure 2. The figure shows the distribution of 597
estimates of persistence in consumption growth or “habit persistence” in studies based on macro and micro data. Solid
and dashed lines show the median estimates in micro (0.0) and macro (0.6) studies, respectively.
In our model, the persistence in aggregate consumption arises as follows. A household whose beliefs
about the aggregate economy are out of date will behave in line with the outdated information. The lag in
perception generates a lag in the response of aggregate spending to aggregate developments.
For aggregate consumption, any household-specific “shocks”, such as sudden changes in personal
income, cancel each other out. Thus, the degree of persistence in aggregate spending will depend on the
frequency with which consumers update their aggregate information. We set the updating frequency in the
model to match the degree of inattention reported in economic studies that examine how consumers
update their inflation and unemployment expectations: according to these studies, only about 25% of
households update their aggregate information each quarter. The model then quantitatively matches the
substantial persistence in aggregate consumption growth estimated in macroeconomic studies.
Despite generating appropriate aggregate persistence, the simulated household-level data reproduce the
finding that consumption growth is almost impossible to predict. This is because the effect of aggregate
shocks is negligible at the micro level; thus; the dynamics of consumption at this level are dominated by
household-level shocks, for which the information is up-to-date (consistent with rational expectations).
In contrast to our model – in which aggregate information is only imperfectly updated – standard models
with rational expectations have difficulty reproducing the contrasting degrees of persistence in aggregate
and household-level consumption growth. They often hardwire “habits” to generate sluggishness.
However, if habits are a true structural characteristic of people's preferences, we should see their effects in
both microeconomic data and macroeconomic aggregates (which we do not, as evidenced by the grey

12/2019 How does sluggish updating of information affect consumer spending?

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2019/html/
ecb.rb191204~8873a505ff.en.html

3/5

bars in Figure 1). In short, our model with relaxed assumptions generates predictions that better fit the
data.
Implications for the reaction of consumption to the 2008 US tax
rebate
Our sticky expectations model can be used to analyse how policies and shocks (think sudden changes in
taxes or aggregate productivity) affect households and spread through the economy. For example, unlike
the standard model with frictionless rational expectations, our model with sticky expectations is able to
match the response of household spending to the 2008 US tax rebate. It is in line with evidence showing
that consumption reacted little to the announcement of this stimulus measure but substantially to the
receipt of the stimulus payment itself. Such spending behaviour was estimated in data from recent
episodes of tax rebates in the United States by J. A. Parker and various collaborators, estimating the
response of consumption to fiscal stimulus payments.
To demonstrate this point, we specifically perform a model experiment designed to correspond to the 2008
US federal economic stimulus. In this experiment stimulus payments are announced before they are
received, and we assume that the announcement of this programme is treated in the same way other macro news is treated.
Our exact experiment is as follows. An announcement is made in quarter t-1 that stimulus payments will
arrive in consumers' bank accounts in the next quarter, t. In line with our sticky expectations parameter, we
assume 25% of households learn about the payment when it is announced, while the other 75% are
unaware until the payment arrives in quarter t. Furthermore, we assume the households who know about
the upcoming payment are able to borrow against it in quarter t-1.
Chart 2
Effects of fiscal stimulus payments on consumption, models vs. data

Note: The figure shows how consumption reacts to a fiscal stimulus payment in data and in models with frictionless and
sticky expectations. The evidence from data is based on Parker, Souleles, Johnson, and McClelland (2013), Table 5, and
Broda and Parker (2014). The “N/A” indicates that, to our knowledge, the literature does not estimate the reaction in
quarters 2 to 4.

12/2019 How does sluggish updating of information affect consumer spending?

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2019/html/
ecb.rb191204~8873a505ff.en.html

4/5

The experiment sharply differentiates the models with frictionless and sticky expectations, both upon
announcement of the payments and when households receive the payments (Chart 2). Let’s first look at when the payments are announced. Upon announcement of the stimulus at time t-1, consumption in the
frictionless model substantially increases: households spend 24.4% of the payment. In contrast, recall that
in the sticky expectations model only a quarter of households update their beliefs when the announcement
is made; thus, consumption rises by only 6.1% of the stimulus payment. What’s important to note here is
that the smaller percentage is in line with studies by Broda and Parker (2014) and Parker (2017), who
estimate no economically or statistically significant change in spending when the household learns that it
will receive a payment. In other words, consumption in the sticky expectations model – our model with the
relaxed assumptions – rises to a degree consistent with the results of empirical studies.
Once the stimulus payment is received, however, households with sticky expectations substantially
increase their spending – by 22.7% of the payment, right in the middle of the 12-30% range estimated by
Parker et al. (2013) – as three quarters of them then learn about the payment by seeing it arrive in their
bank account. In contrast, in the frictionless model the reaction of spending to the receipt of the payment is
more muted (16.5%). In the following two quarters, consumption in the sticky expectations model is higher
by 15.4% and 11.1% of the payment amount respectively. This result also fits with the empirical evidence
suggesting around 40% of the stimulus payment is spent in the first three quarters (Parker et al., 2013). In
short, the predictions of the sticky expectations model match the evidence on how spending reacts to a
fiscal stimulus reported in the literature.
The assumption of sticky expectations provides one way to rationalise evidence on the US episodes of tax
rebates with a small departure from full rationality. There are other explanations referring, for example, to
households’ impatience or lack of sophistication and planning. Both the empirical and the modelling
literature are currently actively investigating how to analyse the effects of announcing various fiscal policies
across countries.
Concluding remarks
Many economic models assume that households have up-to-date information and rational expectations.
Our work illustrates that relaxing these assumptions produces models whose predictions are more
consistent with actual data. In particular, such models can reconcile the contrasting empirical evidence on
consumption growth at the household level and at the aggregate level. We also document that a model in which consumers only occasionally update their aggregate information implies little reaction to an
announcement of a fiscal stimulus in the form of a tax rebate, in line with the data.
In addition, sticky expectations can also provide insights into the effects of monetary policy. It has long
been known that sticky expectations can generate inertia in inflation and inflation expectations. Recently, it
has also been proposed that they substantially affect the transmission of monetary policy: for example,
when households have sticky expectations, they do not react much to central bank announcements, thus
providing a possible explanation for the limited effectiveness of forward guidance (i.e. the “forward
guidance puzzle”).