2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 1/10
25 February 2021 · RESEARCH BULLETIN NO. 81
Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of
relationships and loan renegotiation
By [ ]
Loan renegotiations are expected to surge following the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak and the subsequent crisis, as
more loans default during recessions. At such times, managing lending relationships effectively becomes even more
important for bank governance, risk, and credit supply. My study presents evidence that continuous lending relationships
between bank loan officers and corporate borrowers improve the outcomes of loan renegotiations. The analysis draws
on a novel dataset on corporate loans during a bank reorganisation in Greece in the mid-2010s. This dataset allows us
to empirically identify the causal effect of interrupted relationships. My main findings are that firms that experience an
exogenous interruption in their loan officer relationship are faced with three consequences. First, the firms are less likely
to renegotiate a loan compared to firms with continuous relationships. Second, when loans are renegotiated, firms with
interrupted loan officer relationships receive tougher loan terms. Third, these firms raise more equity, reduce their overall
borrowing, and partially substitute borrowing from other banks. These results point to the importance of lending
relationships in mitigating the cost of distress for borrowers renegotiating loans. It therefore suggests that bank
managers, supervisors, and resolution authorities need to be mindful of the potential costs of changing loan officers.
Introduction
How important are relationships with bank loan officers for corporate borrowers? Could stronger relationships help a firm
secure better loan terms in a renegotiation? Firms in the euro area rely to a large extent on loans from credit institutions.
Such loans account for approximately 30% of euro area firms’ total liabilities and approximately 85% of their total credit.
At the same time, bank financing is mostly mediated by loan officers. For that reason, the relationship between a loan
officer and a firm is expected to affect the issuance and renegotiation of a loan.
Melina Papoutsi 1
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 2/10
Whether the benefits of these relationships offset the costs is a challenging question. On the one hand, such
relationships can reduce asymmetric information and improve loan monitoring. On the other hand, they may contribute
to “evergreening” behaviour and potentially to an increase in non-performing loans. Evergreening means rolling over
loans to firms at a high risk of bankruptcy in order to avoid losses. I study these trade-offs by looking at interruptions in
relationships between loan officers and borrowing firms and their implications for loan renegotiations and firms’ sources
of financing.
The central finding of the paper is that relationships between loan officers and firms do have a significant positive impact
on loan renegotiation. In this study firms with interrupted relationships are less likely to renegotiate a loan compared to
firms with continuous relationships. When renegotiation does occur, firms with interrupted loan officer relationships
receive less beneficial loan terms – significantly shorter maturities and higher collateral requirements – even though
interest rates hardly increase. Lastly, firms alter their capital structure and sources of financing after the relationship with
the loan officer is interrupted.
Interruption of bank lending relationships
Lending relationships between loan officers and borrowers may be interrupted as a consequence of bank mergers and
consolidations, interventions by banking supervisors, fintech developments or regular staff rotation policies. The most
common reason for an interrupted lending relationship is the closure of a branch. For example, banks often consolidate
their branch networks in response to financial distress, as consolidation reduces operating costs and centralises lending
decisions. A banking merger can magnify this effect, as it often leads to the closure of a significant number of branches.
Banking supervisors can give input on such branch closures, as they review bank mergers to ensure the safety and
soundness of the new entity, including its governance and business models. Moreover, the development of fintech
allows banks to move towards business models that rely less on branches and more on online communication with
customers. Last but not least, the relationship between a loan officer and a firm can be interrupted if a bank applies a
loan officer rotation policy. A policy of this type may be recommended as a measure to prevent excessively favourable
treatment of borrowers, or evergreening behaviour by loan officers[ ]
.
2
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 3/10
There are two main challenges for accurately estimating the impact of lending relationships on loan renegotiation. First,
it is difficult to quantify the value of personal relationships. No direct measure of the value of a relationship exists. The
length of a given relationship may seem like a straightforward measure, but the many inter-related factors influencing
the decision to sever an existing relationship make it hard to interpret the effect. These inter-related factors create a
second challenge. A bank’s decision to break an existing relationship may reflect its perception of the declining
creditworthiness of the borrower. Under some circumstances a successful firm may seek to broaden its access to
external finance by weakening its relationship with a particular bank. Such a decision reflects a choice by the firm and
would bias any results estimated by treating relationships as if they are entirely unaffected by the firm’s actions.
To overcome these challenges, in Papoutsi (2021) I use confidential data on corporate loans from a major Greek bank,
that is representative of the Greek banking sector, around the time of a large-scale reorganisation[ ]. The reorganisation
of the bank gives rise to variation in the length of the relationships between loan officers and firms that is exogenous, i.e.
not influenced by any actions by the firms. Meanwhile the detailed confidential data on corporate loans allow us to
quantify accurately the effect of interrupted relationships. During the reorganisation, some bank units are closed and the
loan accounts from those units are merged with accounts in other, surviving units. A bank unit closure interrupts the
relationships between loan officers and firms, because merged accounts are assigned to new loan officers. Thus, after
the reorganisation, two types of firms are identified. First, there are firms whose loans have been transferred to another
unit and whose loan officer relationship has consequently been discontinued. Second, there are firms that have
remained assigned to the same unit. Hard information passes from one loan officer to another during transfers, because
the transfer happens within the same bank. Therefore any differences observed between the two groups after the
consolidation period should be the consequence of interrupted relationships.
Impact on loan renegotiation
According to my results, firms assigned to a new loan officer were significantly less likely to renegotiate a loan. The
empirical results show a statistically significant difference in the probability of these firms renegotiating a loan compared
to firms with continuous relationships. In particular, the results imply a 49% probability of loan renegotiation for firms with
an interrupted relationship, compared with a 59% probability for firms with a continuous relationship. Figure 1 presents
3
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 4/10
the evolution of the effect over time. We observe that before the reorganisation (2012-13) there is no statistically
significant difference between the two groups of firms when it comes to the probability of renegotiating a loan. After the
reorganisation (2014-15), the probability of renegotiating a loan is lower for the firms with interrupted relationships.
Moreover, this effect lasts for at least two years.
Figure 1
Effect of an interruption in the relationship between a loan officer and a firm on
loan renegotiation relative to the year before the reorganisation (2013)
Source: Papoutsi (2021).
Notes: The y-axis shows the difference in the probability of renegotiating a loan (expressed in fractions) between
the firms with interrupted relationships and firms with continuous relationships. The red vertical line shows the time
of the reorganisation. The coefficients are obtained from a difference-in-difference regression of the renegotiation
dummy on an indicator for interrupted relationships and on region and bank unit fixed effects. The bars correspond
to 95% confidence intervals. The economic magnitude of the effect can be estimated in the following way: a loan is
renegotiated on average with 59% probability and the plot shows that the fractional difference between firms with
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 5/10
Moreover, when loans are renegotiated, the firms with interrupted loan officer relationships receive less beneficial terms
and conditions on their renegotiated loans than firms with continuous relationships. Firms with interrupted relationships
face higher interest rates and significantly shorter maturities, while being required to pledge collateral for an amount
65% higher than firms with continuous relationships. The economic magnitudes of the impact on loan maturity and
collateral are significant as they correspond to a maturity approximately two years shorter and an additional €0.78 of
collateral for each euro of loan amount. The plots below present the evolution of these results graphically. The difference
in the loan terms appears in the first year after the interruption of the relationship and increases the following year.
uninterrupted and interrupted relationships is 0.18 (vertical difference between the blue dots for 2014 and 2013).
Thus, firms with interrupted relationships have approximately a 48% probability of renegotiating a loan.
Figure 2
Impact of interrupted relationships on renegotiated loans’ terms relative to the
year before the reorganisation (2013)
Effect on interest rate
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 6/10
Effect on collateral value
Source: Papoutsi (2021).
Notes: The y axis shows the average percentage difference on each of the loan terms between the firms with
interrupted relationships and the firms with continuous relationships. The red vertical line shows the time of the
Effect on remaining days
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 7/10
reorganisation. The bars correspond to 95% confidence intervals. In panel (a), the dependent variable is the level
of the interest rate. In panel (b), the dependent variable is the log of days remaining as a measure of loan maturity.
In panel (c), the dependent variable is the log of collateral value. The estimated effects are obtained from a
regression of the dependent variables on an interrupted relationship indicator and on region and bank-unit fixed
effects. The economic magnitude of the effect on maturity is shown in panel (b) in the following way: a
renegotiated loan receives on average a five-year maturity extension and the plot shows that the fractional
difference between firms with uninterrupted and interrupted relationships is 0.3 (the vertical difference in the blue
dots for 2014 and 2013). Thus, firms with interrupted relationship receive a maturity extension of approximately 3.5
years. The economic effect on the interest rate and on the collateral can be estimated accordingly.
Another finding of the study is that firms raise more equity and reduce their borrowing when the relationship with the
loan officer is interrupted. A change in the capital structure indicates that firms cannot simply substitute lending from
other banks without cost when the relationship with one bank is interrupted. Firms only partially substitute loans from
other banks to make up for reducing the borrowing from the bank where its loan officer relationship was severed. This
change in a firm’s sources of financing is likely to have material implications for the firm’s business model and
investments, and consequently for the real economy.
The empirical results suggest that a stable relationship between a particular loan officer and a firm helps to alleviate
debt overhang through the acquisition of soft information and that this mostly benefits the firms performing well. This
conclusion can be drawn from several tests. First, we do not observe a difference in loan performance in the short run
between firms with interrupted relationships and firms with continuous relationships. This means that the effects on the
terms and conditions of renegotiated loans cannot be explained by firms performing worse economically. Second, one
hypothesis to be examined is whether firms with continuous relationships receive better treatment due to evergreening.
If this hypothesis were true, poorly performing firms would renegotiate more often and on better loan conditions than
firms performing well, in order to prevent them defaulting on a loan payment. In contrast, the impact of an interrupted
loan officer relationship on loan renegotiation is found to be stronger for firms with good repayment histories, high
leverage, and positive growth in earnings.
Conclusions
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 8/10
The option to renegotiate loans is likely to gain hugely in significance following the COVID-19 outbreak and the
subsequent crisis, as loan defaults rise during recession periods. This analysis shows that lending relationships have a
significant positive effect on corporate loan renegotiation, mitigating the cost of distress for firms. Even though the
analysis is not directly linked to the COVID-19 crisis, it provides strong evidence that continuous lending relationships
help firms during default episodes. An uninterrupted relationship between a particular loan officer and a firm helps
eliminate frictions that arise when loans are renegotiated. When a relationship is interrupted, the outcome of any
renegotiation is less likely to be beneficial for the firm, and an efficient contract is less likely to be achieved.
The estimations presented are probably also representative of other European banks. The analysis draws on a novel
dataset on corporate loans and bank reorganisation in Greece, as the uniqueness of the institutional setting combined
with the data available allow us to accurately identify the causal effect on loan renegotiation of an interruption in the
relationship between a loan officer and a firm. However, the results should be considered as relevant beyond the Greek
banking sector. Several banks in the euro area have changed the organisational structure behind their loan officers
during the last decade. This was sometimes due to a merger with another bank, and sometimes a cost reduction policy.
The results therefore suggest that bank managers, supervisors, and resolution authorities need to be mindful of the
potential costs of changing loan officers. For example, in a context of general stress, individual firms could experience
interruptions to several different bank loan officer relationships. This in turn could have a significant effect on firms’
capital structure and borrowing capacity. These results clearly indicate net benefits for firms of stable loan officer
relationships. Indeed, while no one is irreplaceable, when it comes to a firm’s relationship with a bank changing loan
officer can be a big deal.
References
Cole, S., Kanz, M. and Klapper, L. (2015). “Incentivizing calculated risk-taking: Evidence from an experiment with
commercial bank loan officers”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 70, pp. 537-575.
Drexler, A., and Schoar, A. (2014). “Do relationships matter? Evidence from loan officer turnover”, Management
Science, Vol. 60, pp. 2722-2736.
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 9/10
Engelberg, J., Gao, P. and Parsons, C. (2012). “Friends with money”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 103, pp. 169-
188.
Fisman, R., Paravisini, D. and Vig, V. (2017). “Cultural proximity and loan outcomes”, The American Economic Review,
Vol. 107, pp. 457-492.
Haselmann, R., Schoenherr, D. and Vig, V. (2016). “Rent-seeking in elite networks”, SAFE Working Paper Series.
Hertzberg, A., Liberti, J. and Paravisini, D. (2010). “Information and incentives inside the firm: Evidence from loan officer
rotation”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 65, pp. 795-828.
Karolyi, S. (2018). “Personal lending relationships”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 73, pp. 5-49.
Liberti, J., and Mian, A. (2009). “Estimating the effect of hierarchies on information use”, The Review of Financial
Studies, Vol. 22, pp. 4057-4090.
Papoutsi, M. (2021). “Lending relationships and loan renegotiation: Evidence from corporate loans”, ECB Working
Paper series.
1. This article was written by Melina Papoutsi (Senior Economist, Directorate General
Research, European Central Bank). The author gratefully acknowledges the
comments of Simone Manganelli, Alexander Popov, and Zoë Sprokel. The views
expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of
the European Central Bank or the Eurosystem.
2. Related literature has shown that bank-specific governance policies have an effect
on the moral hazard behaviour of a loan officer. Hertzberg, Liberti, and Paravisini
(2010) present evidence that when a loan officer anticipates rotation, reports about a
firm’s creditworthiness are more accurate and contain more bad news about the
borrower’s repayment prospects. Cole, Kanz, and Klapper (2015) show that
performance-based compensation leads to greater screening effort and more
profitable lending decisions.
2/2021 Nothing compares to your loan officer – continuity of relationships and loan renegotiation
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210225~618c0210db.en.html 10/10
Copyright 2021, European Central Bank
3. This analysis is closely related to the literature that identifies the effects of
relationships between bank employees and borrowers. These studies focus on how
lending is influenced by factors such as cultural proximity (Fisman, Paravisini, and
Vig, 2017), social connections (Haselmann, Schoenherr, and Vig, 2016), hierarchical
and geographical distance (Liberti and Mian, 2009), the loan officer being on leave
(Drexler and Schoar, 2014), strong interpersonal connections (Engelberg, Gao, and
Parsons, 2012), or the interruption of a relationship caused by an executive’s death or
retirement (Karolyi, 2018).