7/2021 A time-varying carbon tax to protect the environment while safeguarding the economy
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210728~224099ec93.en.html 1/4
28 July 2021 · RESEARCH BULLETIN NO. 86
A time-varying carbon tax to protect the
environment while safeguarding the economy
By , and [ ]
Climate change is one of the most pressing issues of our time. The challenge for policymakers is that
climate policies could have a negative impact on the economy in the short term. In this article we discuss
how this trade-off between fighting climate change and ensuring a stable business cycle affects the
design of environmental policies. We argue in favour of a time-varying carbon tax that is increased during
booms and decreased during recessions.
Market mechanisms do not address climate change
Climate change is a classic example of a negative externality. Indeed, a fundamental problem is that the
cost for society of activities that emit greenhouse gases into the atmosphere is not reflected in market
prices. Emissions cause climate change, a phenomenon that hurts society as a whole, but this social cost
is typically not taken into account by carbon emitters. Moreover, since the consequences of climate
change will largely be suffered by future generations, the implementation of climate policies is often
postponed until later.
This constitutes a market failure, the source of which is the absence of a market price on emissions.
Consequently, policies that substitute market mechanisms by putting a price on emissions can address
the root cause of the problem. In contrast, laissez-faire strategies that rely exclusively on market
mechanisms to determine prices are not suited to addressing the challenge posed by climate change.
Asset pricing theory can put a price on emissions
Putting a price on emissions can be achieved by introducing a carbon tax. This price should represent the
cost for society caused by greenhouse gas emissions. The main challenge, therefore, is to design a
carbon tax that reflects the social cost of emissions. In our recent study (Benmir, Jaccard and Vermandel,
2020), we argue that asset pricing theory can provide useful insights into this question.
Indeed, the pricing of carbon emissions shares some key similarities with asset pricing. Carbon emissions
have a long duration in the sense that they remain in the atmosphere for very long periods of time.
Consequently, the price of carbon not only needs to reflect the current damage caused to the
environment. The price must also reflect the impact that carbon emitted into the atmosphere will have
over the entire course of its lifetime. To obtain this value, we need to convert a sum of future costs – in our
case the costs caused by carbon emissions to society – into a present value. In finance, the tool that
allows us to convert future flows into a present value is the discount factor. The discount factor reflects the
weight that agents assign to future outcomes when making decisions today.
Discounting plays a central role in climate economics. As illustrated by the debate between Professor
William D. Nordhaus (Nordhaus, 2007) and Professor Nicholas Stern (Stern, 2007), the choice of a
discount factor has a critical impact on the outcome of cost and benefit analyses. In risk assessment
studies, the discount factor can for example determine whether extreme policies are immediately needed.
If a high weight is assigned to short-term costs, the need for adopting measures is less pressing. In
contrast, immediate action becomes critical if a higher weight is assigned to long-term costs that are
expected to materialise in a distant future.
Our approach incorporates recent advances in asset pricing theory into the study of environmental
policies. Discount factors are a cornerstone of modern finance (e.g. Cochrane, 2011; 2017). Building on
this knowledge, we introduce a novel discount factor specification that bridges the gap between finance
and environmental economics. The novelty of our approach is to introduce a link between climate change
and attitudes towards risk, where the presence of an environmental externality induces time variation in
risk aversion.[ ]
Ghassane Benmir Ivan Jaccard Gauthier Vermandel 1
2
7/2021 A time-varying carbon tax to protect the environment while safeguarding the economy
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210728~224099ec93.en.html 2/4
The optimal policy is a carbon tax that varies over the cycle
We find that the optimal policy to counter climate change embeds a trade-off between environmental
protection and safeguarding the economy. There is now a consensus that immediate action to combat
climate change is urgently needed. The challenge, however, is that curbing emissions cannot be achieved
without costs. Indeed, there is evidence that an increase in the price of emissions can have a negative
impact on the economy in the short term (e.g. Bijnens et al., 2021; Känzig, 2021). Our theory shows that a
carbon tax that is optimally designed takes this dimension into account.
Combining our theory with econometric techniques allows us to provide an estimate of the optimal carbon
tax over the cycle. In Chart 1, we report the results of a counterfactual exercise that estimates the
historical evolution of the revenues of an optimal carbon tax for the US economy (expressed in percent of
GDP), as predicted by our theory.
We propose that in crisis times macroeconomic stabilisation should be given priority over environmental
protection. Indeed, as illustrated in Chart 1, the optimal policy should be used to mitigate the effect of
severe recessions. For example, it would have been optimal to reduce the carbon tax sharply during the
great recession of 2007-2009. During booms, in contrast, curbing emissions should be the prime concern.
As emissions in the data are strongly procyclical, combating climate change is optimally achieved by
raising the carbon tax during expansions. Carbon emitters therefore bear the burden of an increase in
taxation during booms, but not during recessions.
Our policy recommendation is robust to variations in specification. The novelty of our approach is to
highlight the possible impact of climate change on attitudes towards risk. However, studies that focus on
the damage caused by climate change to production reach a similar conclusion (e.g. Heutel, 2012).
Environmental policies should be time-varying and prudential.
Implications for equilibrium real interest rates
We find that climate policies and climate change could affect equilibrium real interest rates, i.e. the rates
that equate saving and investment. According to our theory, the reason is that climate change raises risk
aversion. Since risk aversion amplifies the effect of uncertainty on economic decisions, climate change
stimulates precautionary savings. The increase in the supply of savings induced by this mechanism then
lowers equilibrium real interest rates.
Consequently, policies that mitigate the effect of climate change could raise equilibrium real interest rates.
Indeed, the optimal policy set out in our theory reduces the uncertainty caused by climate change. The
key is that this reduction in uncertainty lowers the need for precautionary saving. This lower willingness to
save in turn puts upward pressure on real interest rates, as the availability of funds declines.
Chart 1
Counterfactual environmental tax bill in % of GDP for the US economy
Note: Gray shaded areas are NBER dated recessions.
7/2021 A time-varying carbon tax to protect the environment while safeguarding the economy
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210728~224099ec93.en.html 3/4
This result is potentially relevant for monetary policy. Indeed, low real interest rates increase the likelihood
of hitting the effective lower bound on nominal rates, i.e. the point where nominal interest rates can go no
lower. Policies that increase equilibrium real rates therefore help monetary policy by alleviating this
constraint.
Conclusion
Climate change is a long-term phenomenon. However, as our results suggest, climate policies have
implications for the short and medium term. One main takeaway from our analysis is that the optimal
carbon tax should vary substantially over the cycle. In practice, however, constraints related to political
economy considerations[ ] or the difficulty in assessing the state of the economy in real time could make
the optimal policy difficult to implement. One possible solution would be to delegate this function to an
independent institution endowed with sufficient resources.