Designing QE in a fiscally sound monetary union
26 June 2018
By Tilman Bletzinger and Leopold von Thadden[1]
In response to the global financial crisis the central banks of many advanced economies have adopted
large-scale asset purchase programmes, with particular prominence given to purchases of sovereign debt.

These programmes – often labelled as quantitative easing or QE – are intended to overcome the lower-
bound constraint on short-term interest rates in an environment of persistently low inflation rates. This

article offers a conceptual perspective on a number of design issues of QE that are specific to monetary
unions. In general, design options for QE depend on the degree of institutional completeness of a monetary
union. This is illustrated with findings from a stylised model of a monetary union which assumes an
environment in which the central bank can always be assured that national fiscal policies are sustainable.
Such setting is conducive to a particularly effective design of QE.
Euro area context
Any design of quantitative easing, or QE, for a monetary union like the euro area involves specific
considerations that must take its unique architecture into account. Currently, the euro area consists of a
single monetary policy and 19 fiscal policies that are predominantly decided at the national level.
As stressed in the Five Presidents’ Report, a number of dimensions of this architecture are incomplete,
leading to a call for substantial reforms, including a better governed fiscal framework and better integrated
financial markets. The Report concludes that "...progress will have to follow a sequence of short- and
longer-term steps, but it is vital to establish and agree on the full sequence today. The measures in the
short-term will only increase confidence now if they are the start of a larger process, a bridge towards a
complete and genuine EMU."[2]
Ideally, a comprehensive model-based design of euro area monetary policy options near the lower bound
should take the current incompleteness of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) as given. At the same
time, to ensure a robust forward-looking dimension of the design, judgement will be needed as concerns
possible shorter and longer-term changes to the euro area architecture. Such comprehensive
characterisation of policy options is a formidable challenge.
This Research Bulletin article, based on a parallel paper by Bletzinger and von Thadden (2018), does
something much simpler. Focusing on conceptual aspects, it summarises findings from a model-based
analysis which deliberately isolates the forward-looking dimension. The idea is to explore how QE could be
designed once the EMU has been made more complete via reforms. In particular, our model assumes that
national fiscal policies are subject to a better governed fiscal framework. Moreover, we consider in parallel
a shift towards better integrated financial markets. As summarised in the next section, in such an
environment there is scope for a particularly effective design of QE, comparable to “stand-alone
economies” with a single monetary and a single fiscal policy, and despite possible asymmetries between
the member countries of the monetary union. As emphasised in the final section, incomplete monetary
unions raise additional questions, not analysed in this article.
Long-term policy options under a sound fiscal governance structure
Bletzinger and von Thadden (2018) develop a stylised, analytically tractable model of a two-country
monetary union assuming a sound fiscal governance structure. Soundness is captured by the assumption
that governments of member countries follow credible feedback rules that always preserve fiscal
sustainability. This simplification makes it possible to disregard the notion of sovereign default.[3] Moreover,
the model considers a portfolio balance channel that assumes imperfect substitutability between short-term
and long-term debt.[4] This assumption ensures that central bank purchases of long-term

6/26/2018

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb180626.en.html 2/4

government debt (QE) can be effective via portfolio reallocations along the yield curve, even if the short-
term rate has reached its effective lower bound.[5] Moreover, under certain scenarios sovereign bonds

issued in the two countries are assumed to be imperfect substitutes, e.g. consistent with home bias in

sovereign bond holdings. In order to characterise the design of monetary policy options near the lower-
bound constraint on short-term interest rates in such an environment, the analysis proceeds in two steps.

In a first step, the analysis considers a special parameter case in which the monetary union is symmetric
(implying that both countries are identical such that they behave like a single stand-alone economy). In the
presence of the portfolio balance channel, QE becomes effective. In particular, the paper shows that for
sufficiently small shocks an interest rate rule augmented by QE at the lower bound exists that replicates
the equilibrium allocation and the welfare level of a hypothetically unconstrained economy.
[6] Shocks large
enough to push the whole yield curve to the lower bound require, in addition, forward guidance (i.e. the
promise to keep short-term interest rates lower for longer than implied by a conventional interest rate rule).
[7]

Figure 1 illustrates the effectiveness of QE for a shock that makes the lower-bound constraint on the short-
term interest rate binding. A central bank reaction with QE (ZLB with QE) lowers the long-term interest

rate, when compared with a central bank reaction without QE (ZLB no QE). This lowers the interest rate
that is relevant for private consumption and savings decisions, namely the interest rate on deposits,
thereby stimulating aggregate demand and leading in sum to smaller declines in output and inflation.
Moreover, the magnitude of QE purchases of long-term debt is chosen such as to perfectly replicate the
equilibrium allocation and the welfare level of a hypothetically unconstrained economy (no ZLB).
Figure 1: Impulse responses to a symmetric demand-driven crisis in a structurally symmetric
monetary union with a binding lower bound constraint

5 10 15 20 25
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
output

5 10 15 20 25
-6
-4
-2
0
inflation

5 10 15 20 25
-2
0
2
4
deposit rate

5 10 15 20 25
-2
0
2
4
long-term interest rate

5 10 15 20 25
-2
0
2
4
short-term policy rate

5 10 15 20 25
0
2
4
QE purchases

no ZLB ZLB no QE ZLB with QE
Notes: For the ease of exposition, only the variables of one country are shown. Due to symmetry, those
belonging to the other country are identical. Output and QE purchases are measured in percentage
deviations from steady-state output. Inflation and interest rates are expressed as annualised net nominal
levels in percent. The x-axis is stated in quarters.
In a second step, these results are generalised to an asymmetric monetary union in which the two
countries are no longer identical. The asymmetry is assumed to arise either from an asymmetric exposure
to shocks or from asymmetric structures for the transmission of monetary policy, everything else being
equal. As illustrated in the paper, in equilibrium asymmetries give rise to current account imbalances.
Under weakly integrated financial markets these imbalances are primarily funded through the central

6/26/2018

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb180626.en.html 3/4
bank’s balance sheet, whereas under strongly integrated financial markets the funding is mainly done by
private capital imports. Moreover, the findings support that at the lower bound, as long as asymmetries
between countries result only from shocks (of the type depicted in Figure 1), outcomes under a
hypothetically unconstrained policy rule can be replicated via a symmetric QE design. In other words, the
central bank would purchase equal shares of sovereign debt of the two countries. This finding reflects the
fact that the lower bound imposes a constraint on the uniform instrument of the short-term policy rate,
creating a symmetric restriction for the portfolio adjustments for the two structurally identical countries.
By contrast, asymmetric structures of the countries that matter for the transmission of monetary policy can
translate into an asymmetric QE design. The paper illustrates this finding by assuming that the portfolios of
the banking systems in the two countries exhibit a different degree of home bias. Under the particular
assumptions of the model such an asymmetric structure favours an asymmetric QE design. In other words,
the central bank would purchase a higher share of the bonds issued by the country where banks have
larger exposures to their own sovereign, thereby offsetting asymmetric demand patterns induced by the
lower-bound constraint. This suggests that a portfolio bias in QE has the potential to alleviate differences
arising from asymmetric structures at the lower bound (although in case of exposures that are seen as
excessive a lasting solution will only be offered by structural reforms or regulation).
Final remarks
The above summarised analysis, by construction, does not capture many relevant dimensions of an
incomplete monetary union, like weak fiscal governance structures, concentrated exposures of bank
portfolios to their own sovereign that create negative bank-sovereign feedback loops, and an insufficiently
coordinated aggregate fiscal stance across member states. Thus, when interpreting the findings it needs to
be kept in mind that monetary policy options near the lower bound for an incomplete monetary union
involve many additional considerations. These considerations relate, inter alia, to preserving the
singleness of monetary policy, limited risk-sharing modalities in the absence of a euro area-wide safe asset
and incentives for governments to pursue sound policies. The various safeguards of the ECB's Public
Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP) – which include among others that the shares of purchases are
guided by the ECB’s capital key – incorporate such considerations “commensurate with the current
architecture of Economic and Monetary Union”.[8]
To make the current architecture of the euro area more complete, a balanced agreement is needed on the
substance and sequence of the shorter and longer-term steps to be taken. Such an agreement would
improve the effectiveness of monetary policy in a low inflation environment.