Interactions between monetary and macroprudential
policies
26 March 2019
By Alejandro Van der Ghote[1]
Should monetary policy be concerned with financial stability? Or do financial supervisory and regulatory
policies suffice to achieve this goal? These questions have been prominent in the policy debate since the
global financial crisis. To address them, I develop a tractable monetary model in which systemic risk and
economic activity both depend on financial conditions. I show that there are benefits from using monetary
policy, i.e., interest-rate policies, to enhance financial stability. These benefits are quantitatively moderate,
however, and partly offset by costs in terms of inflation variability.
A central outcome of the global financial crisis has been the development and/or enhancement of financial
supervisory and regulatory policies aimed at curbing excessive risk-taking behaviour and containing
systemic risk in financial markets. Notable developments in this regard include the establishment of the
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the principal role of which is to ensure the safety and soundness of
the European banking system, and the introduction of the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB), which
stipulates the amount of additional Tier 1 capital banks should hold as a share of their risk-weighted assets
during periods of high credit growth and rapid financial expansion.[2] A key question that arises is whether
these supervisory and regulatory policies are enough to safeguard financial stability, or whether – through
its control of short-term nominal interest rates – there is also a role for monetary policy.
In a recent paper (Van der Ghote, 2018), I develop a tractable general equilibrium model to address this
question. At the heart of the model lies the banking system, which intermediates funds between households
and firms and is thus central to the determination of investment and economic activity. This ability to
intermediate is limited by funding constraints, however, which restrict the amount of funds that banks can
raise from households – and thus lend to firms – to a multiple of their net worth. This gives rise to a natural
and tight interrelation between financial conditions and economic activity. If investment is productive, for
instance, output is high and so is the net worth of banks: this relaxes financial conditions and provides an
additional boost to economic activity. On the other hand, if investment is unproductive, output is low and so
is the net worth of banks: this tightens financial conditions and further depresses economic activity.
Like many economic models of its kind, a key feature of this environment is that it may lead to “excessive”
risk-taking by banks. The reason is that the severity of crises increases with the leverage of the banking
system. When a crisis erupts, banks need to liquidate assets to reduce their leverage, but this liquidation
reduces the price of assets, further reducing the net worth of banks and thereby leading to further
liquidation. The more leveraged banks are, the stronger this “fire sale” is. However, because each bank is
relatively small, it does not correctly take into account the contribution of its own decisions on leverage to
the overall severity of the crisis. As a result, there may be excessive risk taking and inefficiently severe
crises in equilibrium. This is why financial regulation is potentially beneficial.
Another important feature of the study is that, unlike most previous work, it explicitly allows for the type of
complex and nonlinear dynamics that arise from the interaction between economic activity and financial
conditions. In particular, the study acknowledges that this type of economy will fluctuate continuously and
spend most of its time outside and far away from what economists usually refer to as “steady state” – i.e.,
the situation attained ultimately in the long run once temporary effects of unforeseen disturbances vanish.
This feature makes the model suitable to assess the effectiveness of policy interventions not just over the
long term, but also over a shorter horizon as well as throughout the financial and economic cycles.

3/2019 Interactions between monetary and macroprudential policies

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2019/html/ecb.rb190326~69778dd7e7.... 2/3

Equipped with this model, I evaluate and contrast two different policy scenarios. In the first scenario, as is
usually the case in developed economies, monetary policy targets only inflation stability, while
macroprudential policy targets only financial stability, and both policies disregard any potential effect they
could have on the other’s objective. In the second scenario, monetary and macroprudential policies jointly
aim to achieve both inflation stability and financial stability. To keep the analysis simple, monetary policy is
limited to the setting of short-term, nominal interest rates, while macroprudential policy is limited to the
determination of capital requirements for banks.[3] Monetary and macroprudential policy rules, however,
are allowed to be nonlinear, and contingent, in particular, on aggregate financial conditions. In the model, a
proxy indicator of those conditions is the net worth or capital of banks. Capital requirements bind if they
restrict banks’ debt-to-asset ratios below those that they would choose of their own accord.
Table 1: Benefits from monetary and macroprudential policies
First policy scenario
(non-coordinated policies)

Second policy scenario
(coordinated policies)
Benefits from inflation stability (1) 0.00% -0.04%
Benefits from financial stability (2) 0.61% 0.72%
Total benefits, (1)+(2) 0.61% 0.68%
Note: Benefits are measured relative to a real, laissez-faire version of the model and are expressed in permanent changes in aggregate per annum
consumption levels.
Table 1 reports benefits from conducting monetary and macroprudential policy optimally in accordance
with their respective objectives under each policy scenario. Benefits from inflation stability are reported in
the first row, those from financial stability in the second row, and the third row reports totals. For
convenience, benefits are measured relative to levels attained in a real, laissez faire version of the model
in which monetary policy has no effect on the real side of the economy and there is no macroprudential
policy. They are expressed in terms of permanent changes in aggregate per annum consumption levels.
A first important takeaway from the exercise is that, under both policy scenarios, optimal capital
requirements bind when aggregate financial conditions are sound but not fully resilient to adverse
disturbances. In other words, binding capital requirements are needed when the net worth of banks is high
but not too high: at such times, banks as a whole have enough net worth to finance most firms, but they do
not have enough net worth to absorb adverse disturbances without unwinding their positions. By reducing
bank leverage, binding capital requirements mitigate the fire sales that would arise – and the inefficiencies
that they would entail – should such adverse disturbances occur. They achieve this, moreover, at relatively
low cost in terms of reductions in aggregate financing to firms. In numerical simulations, as Table 1 shows,
the benefits from such prudential capital requirements for banks are large. The main reason is that, by
lowering systemic risks while banks are relatively well capitalised, these policies significantly reduce the
frequency and intensity of periods of deep financial distress.
But what about the role of monetary policy? In the first policy scenario, monetary policy adjusts nominal
interest rates to keep the economy stable around what economists usually refer to as the neutral growth
path. This essentially means that monetary policy is concerned solely with keeping inflation and
unemployment rates low and stable at their structural levels. In the second scenario, monetary policy
instead contributes to financial stability by (i) stimulating aggregate demand relative to that neutral
benchmark during periods of financial distress, and (ii) slowing down aggregate demand relative to that
same benchmark during tranquil periods. This temporarily stimulates banks’ excess returns during distress
periods, speeding up their recapitalisation and thus the economic recovery at precisely those times when
banks are severely undercapitalised and capital requirements are not useful for stabilising the economy. As Table 1 shows, however, the financial stability gains from this additional contribution of monetary policy
are quantitatively modest. The reason is that monetary policy does not stray too far from its natural
benchmark, both because it still aims to maintain inflation and unemployment rates close to their structural
levels and because – given the presence of optimal macroprudential policies – the additional benefits from
further enhancing financial stability remain moderate. In fact, the use of monetary policy to enhance
financial stability generates costs in terms of increased inflation variability, as shown in Table 1.
To conclude, I develop a tractable model to analyse the effects of interest-rate and capital-requirement
policies throughout the financial and economic cycles. I find that prudential capital requirements for banks
significantly help to enhance financial stability. The use of monetary policy for further promoting financial
stability, however, generates positive but only moderate gains, which are partly offset by costs associated
with an increase in the variability of inflation.