Do consumers respond symmetrically to positive
and negative income shocks?
19 March 2018
By  Dimitris Georgarakos[1]
Recent research finds that consumers respond more strongly to negative than to positive transitory income
shocks, for example, a temporary income tax increase as opposed to a one-off bonus payment. It also
suggests that the response can depend on the size of the change in income. These findings lend empirical
support to economic models that incorporate liquidity constraints and precautionary saving.
Determining how consumers adjust their consumption to changes in income, as well as understanding
which economic models are more consistent with the consumption adjustments observed in the data, is
important for evaluating the effects of a wide range of policy actions, including monetary policy measures
on household and aggregate consumption.
Model predictions and measuring the adjustment of consumption to
shocks
Standard life-cycle models of consumption with permanent income assume that lifetime disposable income
rather than current income determines consumption and that credit markets are perfect. Such models
predict that all consumers should make the same proportional adjustment in their consumption in response
to positive, negative, larger or smaller transitory income shocks. That is, their marginal propensity to
consume (MPC) does not vary. But life-cycle models in which households face liquidity constraints (i.e.
they cannot borrow against their future income) and use savings to buffer income fluctuations predict that
consumers will make a larger adjustment to a negative shock than to a positive one of the same size. They
also predict that the size of the underlying shock matters.[2]
Evaluating the validity of these different model predictions has proved challenging. In general, the existing
literature has examined a number of real life events to measure the consumption response to various
income shocks. For example, some studies have measured how consumption responds either to positive
income shocks (e.g. tax rebates) or to negative income shocks (e.g. unemployment or disability).[3]
However, the estimates of the MPC in these studies are hard to generalise as they depend, to a certain
extent, on the (observed and unobserved) characteristics of the selected sub-group of consumers that has
experienced a given type of a shock. In other words, it is hard to find in real life situations in which every
household experiences a positive or a negative income shock. Moreover, the estimated MPC often reflects
the phase of the business cycle during which the shocks occur. As a result, it is difficult to identify and
measure a possible asymmetric consumption response to negative/positive shocks that is representative
of the entire population and can hence be used to test competing theories.
Empirical evidence on the adjustment of consumption to shocks
Christelis et al. (2017) address the above issues by designing a special set of questions for an internet
consumer survey that is representative of the Dutch population.[4] In particular, consumers were asked
how much they would consume out of a one-time bonus unexpectedly received from the government (i.e.
an unexpected, transitory and positive change in income). The same consumers were also asked how
much they would reduce their consumption in response to a one-time tax unexpectedly imposed by the

3/2018 Do consumers respond symmetrically to positive and negative income shocks?

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb180319.en.html 2/4
government (i.e. an unexpected, transitory and negative income change). In addition, the survey
questionnaire allowed respondents to distinguish between relatively small income changes (an increase or
reduction equivalent to a month’s income) and larger ones (equivalent to three months’ income). Such
questions allow a comparison between the consumption responses of the same consumer to hypothetical
positive and negative (as well as larger and smaller) transitory income shocks, making it possible to
estimate effects that are representative for the population as a whole.
According to the responses to the survey questions, following an increase equivalent to a month’s income,
a consumer would allocate on average 19.6% of the additional income to non-durable consumption, i.e.
they would spend it on food, clothes and travel, etc.[5] The response to a drop in income by the same
amount is larger, with consumers expecting to reduce non-durable spending by an average of 23.8%.
Thus, the MPC in response to negative income shocks is, on average, higher than the MPC in response to
positive shocks. As regards consumption responses to larger income shocks, a rise in income equivalent
to three months’ income would increase non-durable consumption by 14.3%, while the likely consumption
reduction if income fell by that amount is 24.0%. Therefore, the MPC gap between positive and negative
income changes is wider for larger income shocks (i.e. 24.0% - 14.3% = 9.7%) than for smaller income
shocks (i.e. 23.8% - 19.6% = 5.2%). These patterns seem to provide qualitative support for life-cycle
models with liquidity constraints and/or buffer stock behaviour. However, the average MPC estimates just
discussed may hide considerable variation from consumer to consumer.
To show how MPCs can vary across households, we plot the percentiles of the distribution of MPCs
related to positive income shocks (horizontal axis) against those for negative income shocks (vertical axis).
Figure 1 gives the responses to one-month income changes and Figure 2 the responses to three-month
income changes. Each graph also features a 45-degree line which represents symmetric MPCs for positive
and negative income shocks. In both graphs the empirical plots are above the 45-degree line, showing that
percentiles of the MPC distribution out of positive income shocks are matched to comparatively higher
percentiles of the MPC distribution out of negative income shocks. For example, the median MPC out of a
one-month income gain (10%) is graphed against the median MPC out of a one-month income loss (20%)
and is shown in Figure 1 by the point (10, 20) which lies above the 45-degree line. In other words, these
graphs suggest that the consumption adjustment to negative income changes is larger than that induced
by positive changes. It should be also noted that this difference is more evident for three-month than for
one-month income changes. These patterns are broadly in line with those suggested by the average
MPCs reported above.
Figure 1: Marginal propensities to consume out of one-month positive and negative income shocks

Note: The figure plots the percentiles of the distribution of MPCs following a one-month positive income
shock against the corresponding percentiles of the MPCs following a negative income shock of the same
size.

3/2018 Do consumers respond symmetrically to positive and negative income shocks?

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb180319.en.html 3/4
Figure 2: Marginal propensities to consume out of three-month positive and negative income
shocks

Note: The figure plots the percentiles of the distribution of MPCs following a three-month positive income
shock against the corresponding percentiles of the MPCs following a negative income shock of the same
size.
Another way to look at the survey results is to classify the different households according to the economic
models that better characterise their consumption behaviour. Christelis et al. (2017) report that about 40%
of households give asymmetric responses consistent with models incorporating liquidity constraints or
buffer stock behaviour, while about a third of respondents have symmetric MPCs in response to shocks of
different sizes and directions (as in the standard life-cycle models with permanent income and perfect
credit markets). The remaining households report asymmetric MPCs that appear inconsistent with both
types of model, possibly reflecting behavioural biases or a lower level of financial sophistication.
Concluding remarks
The research findings highlighted in this Research Bulletin article suggest important differences in the way
consumers respond to income shocks of different signs and sizes. These differences in consumption
responses that are revealed by micro data analysis could help to better assess the impact of various policy
measures that affect household incomes. In particular, they could ultimately help to deepen our
understanding of fluctuations in aggregate demand and possible inflationary pressures, as well as help in
the analysis of the distributional effects of policy changes.