5/2021
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210527~b7370d7722.en.html 1/6
How has the COVID-19 crisis affected different households’ consumption in the euro area?
31 MAY 2021 · RESEARCH BULLETIN NO. 84
How has the COVID-19 crisis affected
different households’ consumption in the
euro area?
By Dimitris Christelis, , Tullio Jappelli and [ ]
The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has generated a complex economic shock that has affected
households across the euro area very differently. In studying the impact of this shock on household
consumption and the implications for the economic outlook it is critical to understand and factor in these
large divergences. In this article, we use rich data from the Consumer Expectations Survey, a new ECB
household survey that interviews around 10,000 households across the six largest euro area economies
on a monthly basis. We document substantial divergences in pandemic-induced financial concerns of
households across population subgroups and countries, with financial concerns being significantly higher
for younger, female, and low-income individuals in countries where the first wave of COVID-19 was more
severe. Also, we show how these concerns can account to a large extent for the drop in aggregate
household spending in 2020. Reflecting this heterogeneity, our results imply that fiscal measures will be
most effective in stabilising aggregate consumption and supporting economic recovery if they target the
most vulnerable groups with the greatest financial concerns.
Household financial concerns due to COVID-19
According to aggregate data for the euro area, household spending dropped by almost 7% in 2020
compared with 2019. The drop was stronger in France (-8.1%), Spain (-10.9%) and Italy (-8.9%). To
understand how consumption adjusted at the household level, in our recent study (Christelis,
Georgarakos, Jappelli and Kenny, 2020) we exploit household-specific information on how severe the
financial consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic are perceived to be. One would expect pandemicinduced financial concerns to negatively associate with consumption for several reasons. First, financial
concerns depend on current income, access to liquidity and accumulated wealth, with less wealthy
households being less equipped to buffer the adverse consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak. Second,
financial concerns are associated with lower income expectations (e.g. due to the lockdown measures),
depending on the occupation, sector of activity and remote working capability of household members.
Third, financial concerns could reflect an increase in uncertainty about the future, because some
households fear a higher probability of becoming unemployed, or because there is uncertainty about the
duration of the crisis and the economic consequences of further COVID-19 waves. Financial concerns
could also reflect other household-specific factors ranging from, for example, household size to concerns
about future increases in the tax burden.
A growing number of studies investigate the consumption effect of the pandemic in the United States and
in Europe, relying mostly on administrative data.[ ] They typically identify the effect on consumption using
area-level measures of the COVID-19 impact (e.g. deaths per region). Notably, they do not rely on a
household-specific measure of exposure to the COVID-19 shock that can capture the highly
heterogeneous nature of the pandemic’s effect across different households.
We use rich panel data from the Consumer Expectations Survey (CES), a new ECB survey that was
launched as a pilot in January 2020. Since April 2020 the survey has been running at its target sample
size, interviewing around 10,000 households across the six largest euro area economies (Germany,
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands and Belgium) on a monthly basis.[ ] The panel dimension of the CES
data means that respondents are surveyed repeatedly, which is particularly important as it ensures that
the dynamic response of the same households can be studied over time. The survey is representative of
the underlying populations and collects via the internet high-frequency and fully harmonised information
on households’ demographics, income and consumption and on how households perceive the economic
consequences of the pandemic. For many variables we are able to exploit the panel nature of the survey
from April to October 2020.
Dimitris Georgarakos Geoff Kenny 1
2
3
5/2021 How has the COVID-19 crisis affected different households’ consumption in the euro area?
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210527~b7370d7722.en.html 2/6
Figure 1
How concerned households are about their financial situation owing to COVID-19
Consumer Expectations Survey data April – October 2020
(y-axis: share of households in percent, x-axis: level of concern with range 0 (“not at all concerned”) to 10 (“extremely
concerned”)
Note: The figure shows the fraction of responses per level of COVID-19 financial concern and by country. Data are
drawn from the April, July and October waves of the CES.
5/2021 How has the COVID-19 crisis affected different households’ consumption in the euro area?
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210527~b7370d7722.en.html 3/6
The survey asks respondents the following question on the economic impact of the pandemic: How
concerned are you about the impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19) on the financial situation of your
household? (coded from 0, “not concerned”, to 10, “extremely concerned”). Figure 1 plots the distribution
of household financial concerns due to COVID-19 within the six countries included in our study in the form
of a histogram. The share of respondents concerned about their financial situation is higher in those
countries that during the first wave of the pandemic experienced the highest number of COVID-19 cases
and deaths, and stricter lockdown policies limiting citizens’ mobility and engagement in economic activity.
In Italy and Spain 36% and 52% of respondents, respectively, express high concerns (7 or above) about
the financial consequences of COVID-19. Indeed, these two countries stand out with a significant fraction
of households reporting the highest possible level of concern (10). On the other hand, in Germany and
the Netherlands the fractions expressing relatively high concerns (above 7) are 25% and 20%,
respectively.
Further analysis shows that such financial concerns are not distributed evenly across the population. As
shown in Table 1, the pandemic has induced higher financial concerns in younger age groups compared
with those older than 65 years, many of whom have retired and are thus more likely to be more insulated
from income shocks arising from the crisis. In addition, financial concerns due to COVID-19 are higher
among lower income households and households that are liquidity-constrained (i.e. report that they are
not able to meet an unexpected payment equal to one month of their household income). Furthermore,
female respondents generally report higher overall financial concerns. The survey also includes separate
questions on the health consequences of COVID-19 for the respondent and his or her household. Unlike
financial concerns, health-related concerns are considerably higher among the older (65+) and the
middle-aged (36-64) households compared with the young. However, formal econometric analysis shows
that the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on consumption mainly operate through households’
perceptions about the financial repercussions of the shock and not via their concerns about the effects of
the pandemic on their own health.
5/2021 How has the COVID-19 crisis affected different households’ consumption in the euro area?
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210527~b7370d7722.en.html 4/6
How households adjusted their consumption in response to the
COVID-19 shock
In Figure 2 we plot binned values of the (logarithm of) monthly non-durable consumption against the
values of the measure of COVID-19 financial concerns (0-10) discussed above. Comparing those who are
least concerned about the financial consequences of COVID-19 (values of 2 and below) with those that
are very concerned (9 or 10) implies a reduction in consumption of about 25%. Of course, this relation
does not consider other variables that affect consumption. Econometric estimates, controlling for other
variables, indicate that raising concern from 0 (the least concern) to 6 (the median concern) reduces
consumption by 8.2%. On the other hand, concern about COVID-19’s impact on one’s own health as well
as the health of other household members has no statistically significant impact on consumption. The
results suggest that financial concerns are a much stronger independent driver of spending behaviour
than health-related concerns whose effects may instead be transmitted via the impact on the household’s
expected financial conditions (e.g. if a job loss were to arise as a result of health problems). Moreover, as
our estimation controls for current income, socio-economic variables, unobserved household traits (e.g.
risk attitudes) and aggregate effects (e.g. country macroeconomic conditions), precautionary saving is a
likely explanation for the negative association between COVID-19 financial concerns and consumption.
Table 1
Differences in financial concerns due to COVID-19 across demographic groups
Consumer Expectations Survey data April – October 2020
(average based on a scale of 0 (“not at all concerned”) to 10 (“extremely concerned”))
Source: ECB Consumer Expectations Survey. Using weighted data. Individual-level concerns about the household’s
financial situation have been elicited on a monthly basis since April by asking: “How concerned are you about the
impact of coronavirus (COVID-19) with respect to the financial situation of your household?”, with an 11-step
response scale ranging from 0 (not at all concerned) to 10 (extremely concerned). Liquidity constraints are inferred
from the ability of a household to meet an unexpected payment equal to one month of household income.
5/2021 How has the COVID-19 crisis affected different households’ consumption in the euro area?
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb210527~b7370d7722.en.html 5/6
Conclusions
The study suggests that easing pandemic-related financial concerns can counter the observed drop in
spending and can reduce the extent to which households adjust their consumption in response to
negative income shocks. In particular, the large divergences in financial concerns across households
suggest that highly targeted government interventions that aim to lessen the financial concerns of
younger households, lower income households and households with less stable employment conditions
will support consumption of these groups and contribute to economic recovery.
References
Andersen, A., Hansen, E.T., Johannesen, N. and Sheridan, A. (2020), “Consumer Responses to the
COVID-19 Crisis: Evidence from Bank Account Transaction Data”, Covid Economics, No 7, pp. 88-114.
Baker, R.S., Farrokhnia, R.A., Meyer, S., Pagel, M. and Constantine, Y. (2020), “How Does Household
Spending Respond to an Epidemic? Consumption During the 2020 COVID-19 Pandemic”, Covid
Economics, No 18, pp. 73-108.
Bounie, D., Camara, Y. and Galbraith, J. W. (2020), “Consumers’ Mobility, Expenditure and Online-Offline
Substitution Response to COVID-19: Evidence from French Transaction Data”, CIRANO Working Papers,
No 28.
Figure 2
Households’ concern about their financial situation due to COVID-19 and the effect of
this concern on consumption
Consumer Expectations Survey data April – October 2020
(y-axis: Log consumption, x-axis: level of concern with range 0 (“not at all concerned”) to 10 (“extremely concerned”)
Note. The figure shows a scatterplot and a fitted line of the natural logarithm of monthly non-durable consumption
against the COVID-19 financial concern. Data are binned.