COVID-19 and non-performing loans: lessons from past crises

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2020/html/ecb.rb200527~3fe177d27d.en.html 1/7
27 May 2020
RESEARCH BULLETIN NO.71
COVID-19 and non-performing loans: lessons from
past crises
By Anil Ari, Sophia Chen, and Lev Ratnovski[1]
During crises, the number of loans that cannot be paid back increases. What are the lessons from past
crises for non-performing loan resolution after COVID-19? In this article we use a new database covering
non-performing loans (NPLs) in 88 banking crises since 1990 to find out. The data show that dealing with
NPLs is critical to economic recovery. Compared with the 2008 crisis, some factors are conducive to NPL
resolution this time: banks have higher capital, the forward-looking IFRS 9 accounting standards can help
NPL recognition, and the COVID-19 crisis was not preceded by a credit boom. However, other factors
could make NPL resolution more challenging: government debt is substantially higher, banks are less
profitable, and corporate balance sheets are often weak.
A new dataset on the dynamics of non-performing loans during
banking crises
As a result of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, the economy has come to a sudden halt. This is
likely to bring about high levels of non-performing loans (NPLs)¬ – i.e. loans that are in or close to default.
High levels of NPLs are problematic because they impair bank balance sheets, depress credit growth, and
delay economic recovery (Aiyar et al., 2015; Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2015). Persistently high NPL ratios were
a concern in several European countries after the 2008-2012 crisis, and the COVID-19 pandemic can
cause a re-emergence of the NPL problem.
High NPL levels are a common feature of banking crises, and are often studied around such events.
Existing Laeven and Valencia (2013) data report peak NPL levels during crises, but more data are needed
to understand how NPLs evolve and are resolved. Our recent ECB working paper (Ari et al., 2020) bridges
this gap by presenting a new dataset on yearly NPL evolution during 88 banking crises since 1990. The
dataset covers major regional and global crises – the Nordic crisis, the Asian financial crisis, the global
financial crisis – and many standalone crises in developing, transition, and low-income economies. For
each crisis, we report NPLs over an 11-year window around the crisis.
What do we learn from these data?
Most banking crises lead to high NPL levels
During crises, NPLs typically follow an inverse U-shaped pattern. They start at modest levels, rise rapidly
around the start of the crisis, and peak some years afterwards, before stabilising and declining. Looking at
all crises, we see that NPL levels peak at about 20% of total loans on average, but the variance is large: in
developing countries in particular, NPLs can exceed 50% of total loans. Only less than a fifth of banking
crises avoid high NPL levels – which we define as NPLs exceeding 7% of total loans.

Anticipating future levels of NPLs is key for formulating NPL resolution strategies. It is tempting to use pre-
crisis NPL levels to anchor such forecasts. Yet, pre-crisis NPL levels are not a good indicator of post-crisis

NPL problems. After a crisis, NPLs increase to three times their pre-crisis values on average, and over ten
times in extreme cases (see Chart 1).

5/2020 COVID-19 and non-performing loans: lessons from past crises

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2020/html/ecb.rb200527~3fe177d27d.en.html 2/7
Chart 1
Peak non-performing loans during 88 banking crises
Panel A. Peak NPLs, percent of total loans

Panel B. Peak NPLs, multiples of pre-crisis NPLs

Note: Reproduced from Ari, Chen and Ratnovski (2020), Figure 4. The chart shows NPL peaks during 88 banking crises
since 1990. The left panel shows NPL peaks expressed as percent of total loans; the right panel shows the peak NPL

5/2020 COVID-19 and non-performing loans: lessons from past crises

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2020/html/ecb.rb200527~3fe177d27d.en.html 3/7
ratio (i.e. NPLs/total loans) expressed as a multiple of the pre-crisis NPL ratio. Crises that did not have high NPL levels
(with NPLs under 7% of total loans) are shown in light blue in the left panel.
Timely NPL resolution is difficult, but essential for economic
recovery
Countries can facilitate the resolution of high NPLs using a mix of policy measures such as:
Asset quality reviews, to identify loans that are non-performing and need restructuring;
Separating good and bad assets of banks (known as “good bank”-“bad bank” resolution). This makes
the balance sheets of “good banks” more transparent, steadies their market access, and lets them
focus on extending new loans. “Bad banks”, often structured as asset management companies,
proceed to extracting value from bad assets;
Recapitalising “good banks”, to ensure their lending capacity.
More details on NPL resolution methods are provided in Balgova et al. (2016), Beck (2017), Brei et al.
(2020), and in ECB Financial Stability Reviews: Grodzicki et al. (2015) and Fell et al. (2016 and 2017).
Despite the economic benefits of NPL reduction and the variety of methods available, the data paint a
sobering picture of historic NPL resolution. While some countries resolve NPLs rapidly, a third of countries
are saddled with NPLs for over seven years after a crisis. The NPL reduction outcomes after the global
financial crisis are direr yet: two-thirds of the countries that experienced high NPL levels could not resolve
those within seven years after the crisis (see Chart 2). Strikingly, this also implies that while advanced
economies tend to have lower post-crisis NPLs, these take longer on average to resolve.

Chart 2
Mixed success in resolving non-performing loans after crises
Panel A. How many years did NPL resolution take?





5/26/2020 COVID-19 and non-performing loans: lessons from past crises

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2020/html/ecb.rb200527~3fe177d27d.en.html 4/7
Note: Reproduced from Ari, Chen and Ratnovski (2020), Figure 6. The left panel shows the number of countries that
resolved NPLs (i.e. reached NPL ratios of under 7% of total loans) in each year after the crisis. The right panel compares
the number of countries that resolved NPLs within 7 years with the number of those that didn’t. The colours distinguish the
crisis waves and types

In our paper, we use the “local projections” method to assess the link between NPL resolution and post-
crisis output dynamics, while controlling for their co-dependence. The results underscore that NPL

resolution is critical for economic recovery. High and unresolved NPLs are associated with deeper
recessions and slower recoveries. Six years after the start of a banking crisis, output in countries that
experience high NPL levels is 6.5 percentage points lower than in countries that don’t. Of the countries that
have high NPL levels, output in those that do not resolve NPLs is more than 10 percentage points lower
than in those that do (see Chart 3). This means that not resolving high NPL levels reduced output growth
by 1.5 percentage points per year at least for the next six years.
Panel B. Were NPLs resolved within 7 years?

5/2020 COVID-19 and non-performing loans: lessons from past crises

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2020/html/ecb.rb200527~3fe177d27d.en.html 5/7
Panel B. Difference in post-crisis GDP between countries that resolve high NPLs (within 7 years)
and those that do not

Note: Reproduced from Ari, Chen and Ratnovski (2020), Figure 6. The charts report the difference in output paths
(expressed as percent of deviation from pre-crisis output) between countries that, following a banking crisis, have NPLs
exceeding 7% of total loans and those that have NPLs under 7% of total loans (left panel); and between countries that,
having experienced NPLs exceeding 7% of total loans, manage to resolve them and those that do not (right panel). The
blue line is a central projection of the impulse response function. The x-axis shows the number of years after a crisis.
Chart 3
Non-performing loans and economic recovery
Panel A. Difference in post-crisis GDP between countries that experience high NPLs and those that
do not

5/2020 COVID-19 and non-performing loans: lessons from past crises

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2020/html/ecb.rb200527~3fe177d27d.en.html 6/7
What explained slow NPL resolution in Europe after the 2008-2012
crisis?
We further use a model selection approach to assess which pre-crisis indicators predict the dynamics of
NPLs in banking crises. We document that NPL peaks are higher in countries with lower GDP per capita,
after a credit boom, under fixed exchange rates, with less profitable banks and with more fragile corporate
balance sheets. NPL resolution is more protracted in similar circumstances, and in countries with high
public debt and more sophisticated banking sectors. Interestingly, these high-level indicators have good
predictive power: the average (pseudo) adjusted R-squared across the specifications is 0.24.
These results shed light on the factors behind high and persistent NPLs in some European countries after
the 2008-2012 crisis. In our paper, we compare actual NPL dynamics in seven European countries
(Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Hungary and Slovenia) with what could have been anticipated
based on historical patterns.
It turns out that high NPL levels in Europe in the 2010s were hard to anticipate: the crisis was
extraordinarily severe for advanced economies. By contrast, protracted NPL resolution was in line with
historical patterns: it is common for crises that follow a credit boom (see Chart 4). Indeed, the long-term
negative consequences of credit booms are well-documented in the literature (Caballero et al., 2008,
among others). They are related to the difficulties in resolving the debt of non-viable “zombie” firms and
households that are “underwater” on their housing assets.

Chart 4
Actual non-performing loans in Europe versus what could have been predicted
NPL peaks, % of total loans Time to resolve NPLs, years

Note: Reproduced from Ari, Chen and Ratnovski (2020), Figure 7. The chart shows NPL metrics: actual (in green) and
out-of-sample predicted (in blue), on average for a sample of European countries affected by the 2008-2012 crisis. The
metrics of NPLs are: NPL peaks as percent of total loans (left panel) and the duration of NPL resolution in years (right
panel).
What can we infer for NPL resolution after COVID-19?
Even though our paper studies NPLs in the context of banking crises, and thus cannot perfectly be
mapped to the COVID-19 events, it provides valuable insights into impending NPL challenges. Our results
highlight forces that can make NPL resolution after the COVID-19 events different from that after the 2008-
2012 crisis.

Some forces are conducive to NPL resolution. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic is not a credit-boom-
induced crisis. If the economic downturn proves temporary, many post-COVID-19 NPLs may relate to

viable illiquid firms, rather than unviable zombie firms. European banks have entered the COVID-19
pandemic with on average higher capital ratios compared with the 2008 crisis. The recently introduced
IFRS 9 accounting standards may induce faster NPL recognition, and hence resolution, thanks to their
forward-looking nature (although NPL recognition that is too fast may also constrain bank lending during
downturns).

5/2020 COVID-19 and non-performing loans: lessons from past crises

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2020/html/ecb.rb200527~3fe177d27d.en.html 7/7
Other forces point to challenges in NPL resolution. Compared with 2008, most European countries have
substantially higher public debt, less profitable banks, and in many cases weaker corporate sector
conditions – the factors that, historically, have complicated NPL resolution. Moreover, if the economic
recovery from the pandemic is slow and protracted, credit losses from corporate distress will rise and could
overwhelm banks, further complicating NPL resolution.
Given the importance of NPL reduction for economic recovery and many countries’ historical difficulties in

implementing effective NPL-related measures, designing effective NPL resolution policies for the post-
COVID-19 world is a key forward-looking financial policy issue for Europe today.