After the credit squeeze: how labour market
flexibility can strengthen firm growth and
employment
14 November 2018
By Luc Laeven, Peter McAdam, and Alexander Popov[1]
How beneficial is labour market flexibility – for instance, the ability to hire and fire workers – for firm
growth? And how does such flexibility interact with a firm’s ability to obtain bank credit? This article
provides evidence that less rigid employment protection benefits firms during times of scarce credit. We
study the performance of credit constrained Spanish firms during the financial crisis of 2008-09, exploiting
a firm-size-specific labour regulation that imposes more stringent employment protection on firms with
more than 50 employees. We find that Spanish firms with fewer than 50 employees operating in sectors in
which labour and capital are close substitutes grew faster during the financial crisis when exposed to a
negative credit shock than similarly credit constrained but larger firms. This effect is more pronounced for
firms that were more productive before the crisis, suggesting that flexible employment protection laws
benefit otherwise healthy firms that are credit constrained, by enabling them to substitute labour for capital
and continue growing.
Labour market flexibility and financial crises
Economists and policymakers tend to believe that the quality of market institutions positively affects
economic performance. Because of that, structural reforms are often a condition for fiscal assistance to
stressed countries. A package of structural reforms typically includes measures that liberalise a country’s
labour market or make it more flexible – making it easier, for instance, to hire and fire workers. Such
measures are said to deliver large economic benefits to liberalising countries (Dustmann et al., 2014).
While empirical evidence of the success of labour market reforms abounds, it mostly focuses on the “up
phase” of the cycle (see Autor et al., 2007; Ichino and Riphahn, 2005). At the same time, there are equally
good arguments to suggest that more flexible labour markets will deliver substantial benefits to a country’s
economy during downturns, by facilitating “creative destruction” and by allowing firms with good growth
prospects to continue growing (see Caballero and Hammour, 1994).
This article (based on Laeven, McAdam, and Popov, 2018) presents novel evidence that flexible
employment protection law – that is, a flexible labour market – benefits otherwise healthy firms during a
credit crunch. We demonstrate a robust fact: credit constrained firms grow faster if they are subject to less
strict firing and hiring restrictions, as long as they are technologically able to substitute labour for capital.
Our findings are based on data from Spain, a country with structurally high unemployment levels.
Institutional and empirical design
Labour regulation in Spain is characterised by well-defined, firm-size-specific rules, under which
employment protection is notably more stringent for firms with more than 50 employees. There are two
rules that concern us here. First, the negotiation period in the case of collective dismissals is twice as long
for firms with more than 50 employees, typically resulting in higher severance pay per employee. Second,
in firms with more than 50 employees, a collective dismissal has to be accompanied by a social plan to
  

11/2018

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb181114.en.html 2/5
mitigate the consequences for the affected workers. Moreover, such companies also have to carry out a
special training and redeployment plan of at least six months implemented by means of an authorised
outplacement company. This implies that the cost of hiring the marginal worker, given that she may have to
be fired (or made redundant) in the future, is higher for such firms.[2] As a result, firms facing stricter firing
restrictions will be less likely to hire additional workers when they need to keep growing.
The credit crunch of 2008-09 resulted in a sudden and drastic increase in firms’ borrowing costs. Spanish
banks were not all equally affected by the crisis, and some required large recapitalisations, of the overall
order of 1.1% of GDP. While some of these actions took place right at the start of the crisis, further
consolidation operations and the bulk of the nationalisations took place throughout the crisis. During this
period, savings banks were forced to transform into commercial banks, and the European Financial
Stability Facility provided financial assistance for the recapitalisation of a number of banks. Overall, a total
of 71 banks were subject to some kind of intervention. While during the crisis the supply of credit declined
across the board, new credit issued by affected savings banks declined significantly more. Weak banks
rationed credit by charging substantially higher average interest rates than healthy banks (Bentolila et al.,
2018). Firms borrowing from affected banks therefore experienced a larger increase in borrowing rates,
giving them a greater incentive to substitute labour for capital in order to keep operating.
Within the subset of firms that would like to substitute labour for capital, when subject to tightening
borrowing constraints and less strict labour regulation, only those that can easily replace capital with
labour (i.e., those that exhibit a high degree of substitutability between workers and machines, or “high
sigma”) will be able to do so. So it is important to identify which firms are able to substitute one of those
factors of production for the other. (Our sectoral estimates of the substitution elasticity range from a low of
0.4 for the coke production sector to a high of 2.0 for the construction sector, with a median value of 0.9.)
Balance sheet shocks lead banks to reduce credit to their borrowers, and many studies have argued that
smaller firms are affected more severely by this process as their investment projects are more opaque and
uncertain (see Berger and Udell, 1995). This firm-size effect would imply that after a shock to their main
bank, firms with fewer than 50 employees may suffer more in terms of growth as banks tighten credit
relatively more for them. Figure 1 plots growth rates before and after the credit shock for the firms in our
sample. It clearly shows that while small and large firms were growing at approximately the same rate up
to 2007, once the shock hit in 2008 sales growth declined considerably more for smaller firms. This is
consistent with steeper credit constraints for smaller firms.
However, Figure 2 demonstrates that this divergence in growth rates is driven by firms in sectors in which
capital and labour cannot readily be substituted for each other (“low-sigma” sectors). At the same time, for
firms in sectors in which they can (“high-sigma” sectors), affected firms with fewer than 50 employees post
relatively higher growth than affected firms with more than 50 employees. This suggests that in the
absence of substitutability between these two factors of production, the firm-size effect can dominate the
employment-protection effect, and only firms that can substitute labour for capital will benefit from flexible
employment protection laws in the presence of credit constraints.
After the credit squeeze

11/2018
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb181114.en.html 3/5 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012

Year of reference

Sales growth, <50 workers Sales growth, >=50 workers
-.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012

Year of reference

Sales growth diff, high-sigma Sales growth diff, low-sigma
Notes: High (low) sigma denotes above-median (below-median) estimated elasticity of substitution
between capital and labour values. The sales growth figures on the vertical axes are measured in annual
percentage differences.
Labour market flexibility, financial crises, and firm growth: main
results
The analysis exploits a dataset containing full balance sheet information for around 110,000 Spanish firms,
observed both before and after the crisis, and covering the full size distribution of firms, from 1 employee

After the credit squeeze

11/2018

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2018/html/ecb.rb181114.en.html 4/5
to over 1,000 employees.[3] The dataset also contains information on bank-firm relationships, making it
possible to reliably measure a tightening of credit constraints at the level of the firm by isolating firms with
credit relationships with banks that experienced severe balance sheet problems during the crisis. Overall,
26% of the firms in the sample have a credit relationship with one of the 71 Spanish banks that required
government intervention during the crisis.
The main finding is that Spanish firms with fewer than 50 employees grew relatively faster during the
financial crisis when exposed to a negative credit shock than similarly credit constrained but larger firms in
sectors in which labour and capital can be more easily replaced with one another. This result emerges
regardless of firm-specific factors such as cash flows and net worth that vary over time and can affect firm
growth in the absence of credit shocks or firm-size-specific labour regulation. It is also apparent when
controlling for differences between firms and sectors other than firm size. The main effect is still
documented when comparing smaller and larger firms closer to the 50-employee threshold, when other
underlying industry characteristics, such as dependence on external finance, are controlled for, and when
the sample is restricted to firms with a credit relationship with only one bank. Moreover, firms subject to
less stringent employment protection in sectors with high substitutability between labour and capital
experience higher rates of employment growth, but not higher investment growth. This confirms the
underlying process at work. Crucially, the main effect is much more pronounced for firms with sales and
productivity growth that was relatively high before the crisis started. Taken together, these results suggest
that flexible employment protection benefits firms faced with an exogenous shock to their user cost of
capital, by enabling them to substitute labour for capital and so to continue growing.
Concluding remarks
The pattern uncovered in the data provides one argument in favour of the adoption of flexible labour laws.
While such labour market reforms can be associated with job losses for individuals, in the aggregate they
allow firms to recover more quickly from a deep recession whose roots are in the banking sector. Since the
financial crisis, Spain has in fact embarked on a package of labour market reforms with a view to making
labour markets more flexible and, in particular, easing the cost of dismissals for firms. This has led to a
reduction in the wage bill of the average firm and generated an economic recovery and a fall in the
exorbitantly high levels of unemployment. For such reforms to succeed overall it is critical that the benefits
accruing to firms are shared with dismissed workers, either through job creation or redistribution.