10/21 Low rates and bank stability: the risk of a tipping point
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb211014~872f55be7d.en.html 1/4
14 OCTOBER 2021 · RESEARCH BULLETIN NO. 88
Low rates and bank stability: the risk of a
tipping point
By [ ]
Policy rates in advanced economies are unusually low. What effect does this have on bank stability? I
identify two competing effects. On the one hand, low rates harm bank profits by squeezing interest
margins. On the other hand, they boost the value of long-term assets held by banks. Using a standard
banking model, I determine the policy rate level at which these two forces cancel each other out, i.e. the
tipping point. Past this tipping point, the net effect of low rates on bank capital is negative. Applying the
model to the US economy, I quantify the tipping point in August 2007 as a policy rate of 0.55%.
Introduction: the economic implications of low rates
Since the global financial crisis, advanced economies have experienced unusually low interest rate levels.
This has spurred academic and policy discussions about the economic implications of such low rates for
the banking sector.[ ]
The discussions have focused mainly on the effects on bank lending. Evidence has shown that low rates
make banks lend to riskier counterparts (Dell’Ariccia, Laeven and Suarez, 2017; Heider, Saidi and
Schepens, 2019), and that low rates may reduce the overall quantity of lending (Brunnermeier and Koby,
2018; Repullo, 2020).
When is bank solvency affected? A model to identify the tipping point
The research I present in this article, developed fully in Porcellacchia (2021), studies the effect of low
rates on bank solvency and hence on the probability of a crisis. It develops a model closely based on
Allen and Gale (1998) and shows the existence of a critical policy rate level, dubbed the tipping point.
Past the tipping point, an interest rate cut has a negative net effect on bank capital and may indeed result
in bank insolvency. From the model, we learn which bank characteristics matter for the tipping point and
how they affect it. Using these theoretical results, we can use data on banks to quantify the tipping point.
Conceptual framework: the deposit franchise as a bank asset
To discuss bank solvency, we need to understand what constitutes the assets of a bank from an
economic point of view. In this respect, the model makes clear that we should not only think of bank
assets according to accounting standards (e.g. loans, bond holdings, etc.). A bank’s deposit franchise,
which is generally not capitalised on bank balance sheets, is also a relevant bank asset.[ ]
 The deposit
franchise is the value for a bank of having a deposit base on which it earns an interest margin. Chart 1
summarises this view in an “economic” bank balance sheet.
Davide Porcellacchia 1
2
3
10/21 Low rates and bank stability: the risk of a tipping point
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb211014~872f55be7d.en.html 2/4
In this framework, a bank is solvent as long as its assets, which include its deposit franchise, are enough
to cover its deposits. If not, a crisis is precipitated by deposit withdrawals. With this concept of solvency in
mind, the question becomes: what is the effect of a low policy rate on bank assets?
Effects of the policy rate on bank assets
A reduction in the policy rate has two competing effects on bank assets. First, there is a revaluation effect.
Bank loans and other securities held by banks are typically long-term. This means that, when the policy
rate falls, the interest rate those assets earn does not. Hence, these assets appreciate in value. This
effect strengthens bank solvency. Second, an erosion of the deposit franchise occurs. As the policy rate
falls, banks’ interest margins become thinner, since cash increasingly becomes a better outside option for
depositors. This effect weakens bank solvency.
At normal values of the interest rate, the revaluation effect dominates. That is, a small policy rate cut
bolsters bank solvency. However, the further the policy rate falls, the larger the adverse effect on the
deposit franchise becomes. At the tipping point, the two effects cancel each other out. Past the tipping
point, the deposit-franchise effect dominates and a policy rate cut hurts bank solvency.
Key variables to quantify the tipping point
Quantification of the model’s tipping point is possible with just a few observable bank characteristics. The
key variable in quantifying the deposit-franchise effect is banks’ interest margin. The key variable for the
revaluation effect is the average time to maturity of bank loans and other securities held by banks. In
August 2007 in the United States, on average these two variables stood respectively at 2.4% and 4.5
years.
Chart 2 plots the tipping point as a function of the time to maturity of bank-held securities. Banks are more
resilient to low rates when they hold longer-term securities. In fact, if banks held exclusively overnight
securities such as bank reserves, then there would be no revaluation effect and the tipping point would
correspond to the bank’s interest margin. A stronger revaluation effect pushes the tipping point down. Our
observed value for average bank asset maturity (4.5 years) implies that a 0.55% policy rate is the tipping
point.
Chart 1
A stylised “economic” bank balance sheet
10/21 Low rates and bank stability: the risk of a tipping point
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2021/html/ecb.rb211014~872f55be7d.en.html 3/4
The main purpose of this quantification is to illustrate the properties of the model. The purpose is not to
estimate a tipping point, valid at different points in time or for different economies. Indeed, it would be
wrong to attribute the value of 0.55% to the euro area or the United States today. Their economic
fundamentals are different from those of the US economy before the global financial crisis. Moreover, the
state of the banking system in these economies has changed profoundly since 2007, as banks have had
time to transition to the new economic environment.
Conclusion
This research shows that very loose monetary policy can have an adverse impact on the health of the
financial system. It proposes the tipping point as a model-based indicator, which summarises information
about the banking sector and marks the policy rate level at which concerns about financial stability are
warranted. In the region past the tipping point, the benefits of monetary easing should be more carefully
weighed against the costs to financial stability.[ ]
More work is required to obtain a sound quantification of the tipping point, also for the euro area. As it
stands, the model is highly stylised. By design, its elements are easily mapped into empirical counterparts
to make quantification possible. However, many important bank characteristics, such as capital regulation,
find no place in the model. Also, interest rate dynamics are overly simplified with the assumption of a flat
yield curve.