SPEECH
RBI Bulletin December 2019 19
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
a long distance - as Secretary Industry, Secretary 
Economic Affairs, Secretary to Prime Minister and 
Governor of RBI. LK was stunned on why and how 
he had preserved this old visiting card of his Joint 
Secretary era. The old man said he had been struck 
by LK’s brilliance in his first meeting and decided to 
preserve this card for so many decades hoping that 
he might meet him again and certain that he would, 
no doubt, rise to a high public office. While LK was 
amused, the old man’s quest had been realised.
LK represented what may be quintessentially 
called a liberal mind. He constantly endeavoured in 
multiple responsibilities to seek measures which 
would free up the economy, enhance productivity 
through competition, contribute to growth and provide 
enough fiscal room to address issues of poverty and 
welfare. Indeed, this mind set was endemic to him and 
anecdotes suggest that when he left the responsibility 
of Secretary to Indira Gandhi to move as Governor of 
the Reserve Bank of India, the South Block was bereft 
of a liberal approach. For successive years thereafter, 
there was the dominance of a left oriented approach 
believing excessively in enhanced public outlays and 
strengthening regulations.
My last meeting with him was when he came to 
Patna to file his nomination for the Rajya Sabha in 
1986. By then I had already returned to Bihar and was 
Principal Secretary Industry. Sitting out on the lawns 
of my parental house, he recalled with nostalgia about 
the days gone by, his long association with our family 
and how he missed my parents with whom his family 
had a strong association. Regrettably, this was my 
last meeting with him because he passed away while 
he was still a Member of Rajya Sabha, from Bihar. 
Understandably the Washington Post in its obituary, 
said that ‘Jha epitomised the steel frame of Indian 
government’. It had also said a little earlier that ‘Jha 
moved as comfortably with the power brokers of 
Washington and London as he did with those of New 
Delhi. Even after he ended his formal government 
service, his views were constantly sought out by 
I am greatly privileged and honoured to speak at 
this prestigious L K Jha Memorial Lecture. For me this 
is more than a lecture for several reasons. First and 
foremost, my own personal association, with Shri L K 
Jha, (to me LK Uncle), dates back from my childhood 
days. He not only came from the same district as my 
father but they went to London together - while he went 
to Cambridge my father was at the London School of 
Economics. Both joined the Indian Civil Service in the 
same year of 1936. By the time I joined the civil services, 
LK’s fame and reputation as an administrator, policy 
maker, with domain understanding of economics and 
finance had spread far and wide. There are several 
anecdotes about him which I have mentioned in my 
forthcoming autobiography and would not like to 
repeat them here. Irresistibly I must mention one.
When I was serving as Minister of Economic and 
Commerce in the Indian Embassy in Japan, LK had 
led a preparatory mission to Japan in 1984 comprising 
of senior policy makers and senior corporates to 
prepare for the forthcoming visit of Prime Minister 
Indira Gandhi. I recall that during that visit, a small 
dinner was hosted for him by Nisho Iwai who was 
also part of the fabled Shoga-shosha - meaning a very 
large Japanese Company that trades internationally in 
a wide range of goods and services. During this dinner 
a very old gentleman, who had since retired from the 
company, shook hands with LK and then gave him 
a card that had his name and designation as Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of Industrial Development. He had 
met LK decades ago and since then LK had travelled 
* Seventeenth L K Jha Memorial lecture delivered at the Reserve Bank of 
India, Mumbai on November 22, 2019. The views and opinions expressed 
are those of the author alone.
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and 
Practice*
N. K. Singh
SPEECH
20 RBI Bulletin December 2019
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
leading political figures and as similarly were heeded 
whenever he felt it necessary to speak about on any 
major issues’.
I have selected today’s broad theme on this 
subject of fiscal federalism, given the fact that one 
of the last public offices which he held was to head 
the Economic Administrative Reforms Commission in 
the 1980s which had multiple ideas on restructuring 
our governance rubric in an era of what he called 
Globalisation.
At today’s lecture, I intend to discuss the 
changing landscape of Centre-State relations and the 
Dynamic Federal Polity of India. Federalism means 
different things to different people. There are federal 
romantics who believe that the future of India lies in 
greater autonomy and power to States and that the 
evolution of the polity has deprived the States to make 
a more meaningful contribution in our development 
process. They could equally say so about the third tier 
of the government namely Panchayat and Urban Local 
Bodies. There are others, however, who look at this 
issue in a more clinical way broadly examining the 
architecture of fiscal federalism and its adherence to 
the original architecture. But as Charles Kennedy said 
that ‘we have to win vocabulary before we succeed in 
the vision’. The same holds true for Fiscal Federalism.
Indeed, the term was first introduced by the 
German born American economist Richard Musgrave 
in 1959. According to Wallace E. Oakes writing in 
1999 much later on Fiscal Federalism said that ‘it is 
concerned with understanding of which functions 
and instruments are best centralised and which are 
best placed in the sphere of decentralised levels of 
government. This concept applies to all forms of 
government: unitary, federal and confederal’.
Evolution
It would be useful to dwell for a while on the 
evolution of Fiscal Federalism in India. Many of its 
features are intertwined with the history of East India 
Company and the British Crown.
The East India Company was granted a Charter 
of incorporation by Queen Elizabeth in 1600 CE, 
which gave the Company exclusive right of trading 
with India.
East India Company set up a number of factories 
and trading centres at different places in India. 
Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta became the main 
settlements and were declared as presidencies.
Under the Act of 1773, the Calcutta Presidency 
was given full powers over the other two presidencies 
of Madras and Bombay, which for the first time 
resembled setting up of a Government. However, only 
in the Charter Act of 1833, did a central fiscal authority 
with Presidencies as constituents was formed, which 
vested the financial and legislative powers in India 
solely in the Governor-General of Bengal, who was 
designated the Governor-General of India making the 
entire administration centralised.
The current system of the financial year ending 
on 31st March along with the principles of the English 
budget system were adopted with crown taking direct 
control in 1858.
Union, State and Concurrent Lists in the current 
Indian Constitution have their genesis from the first 
Budget, which was presented in 1860-61 under the 
new system.
A system of diarchy, dividing the administrative 
subjects into two categories - Central and Provincial 
was a result of the Montague-Chelmsford reforms 
enacted in the Government of India Act, 1919. Under 
the Act, provinces got power by way of delegation and 
the Central Legislative retained the power to legislate 
for the entire country relating to any subject. The 
sources of revenue were also divided between the 
Centre and Provinces.
In 1927, to review the working of the Act of 
1919, the Simon Commission was appointed. The 
commission favoured the formation of Indian Princely 
SPEECH
RBI Bulletin December 2019 21
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
States and Provinces, which were the administrative 
divisions of British Government.
The Government of India Act, 1935 established a 
federal system with Provinces and Indian States as two 
distinct units. Under the act, legislative powers were 
distributed under three lists - Federal List, Provincial 
List, and the Concurrent List. The Act made the 
revenues and finances of the Provincial Government 
distinct from those of the Federal Government. The 
act provided for collection and retention of levies by 
the Federal Government and spelled out details of the 
distribution of financial resources and grants-in-aids 
to provinces.
As per the Act, such sums as prescribed by his 
majesty in Council were to be charged on the revenues 
of the federation. The Government of India Act, 1935 
established the basic structure of fiscal federalism in 
India, one that survives even today.
Constituent Assembly was constituted in 1946, 
which adopted a unitary form of government. The 
federal framework evolved, however, indigenously 
over a period. The final shape to the federal form of 
government and federal finance was incorporated 
in the Government of India Act, 1935. It also had 
some features of a parliamentary system. However, 
the nature of the relationship between the proposed 
federal Government and the Provinces of British India 
relative to that of the Princely States was resolved 
only after independence, but before the Constitution 
was adopted.
Post-Independence
At the time of Independence, India had nine 
Provinces and over 500 Princely States. The Princely 
States accounted for 40 per cent of the territory and 
30 per cent of the population, and were diverse in 
size, character, systems, and in the nature of their 
relations with British India. They were integrated 
with India after Independence, and the Union of 
States came into existence on 26th January 1950.
The evolution of fiscal federalism in India thus 
has a long genesis. It primarily dates back to the 
government of India Act of 1919 and 1935. While the 
Act of 1919 provided for a separation of revenue heads 
between the Centre and the provinces, the 1935 Act 
allowed for the sharing of Centre’s revenues and for 
the provision of grants- in-aid to provinces.
Article 1 of our Constitution describes India, 
that is, ‘Bharat as a ‘Union of States’ rather than a 
‘Federation of States’.
There was no unanimity in the Constituent 
Assembly with regard to the name of the country. 
Some members suggested the traditional name 
(Bharat) while others advocated the modern name 
(India). Hence, the Constituent Assembly had to adopt 
a mix of both (‘India, that is, Bharat’)
Secondly, the country is described as ‘Union’ 
although its Constitution is federal in structure. 
On November 4, 1948, while moving the Draft 
Constitution in the Constituent Assembly, B.R. 
Ambedkar responded to the question as to why India 
is a ‘Union’ and not a ‘Federation of States’:
‘The Drafting Committee wanted to make it 
clear that though India was to be a federation, the 
federation was not the result of an agreement by the 
States to join in a federation and that the federation 
not being the result of an agreement no State has the 
right to secede from it. The Federation is a Union 
because it is indestructible.’
Political scientist Alfred Stepan classified India 
as a ‘holding together’ as opposed to a ‘coming 
together’ federation. Unlike the federal form of 
government in the United States, which is described 
as an indestructible Union composed of indestructible 
States, India is an indestructible Union of destructible 
States.
The units of Indian federation have undergone 
multiple transformations since 1947. This is because 
SPEECH
22 RBI Bulletin December 2019
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
Article 3 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to 
create new States. While such a provision can be seen 
as giving the Union too much power, it has arguably 
been central to holding India together since it allows 
the federation to evolve and respond to sub-national 
aspirations.
While initially, in 1950, the Constitution 
contained a fourfold classification of the States of the 
Indian Union, into Parts A, B, C, and D. By the States 
Reorganisation Act (1956), the distinction between 
Part-A and Part-B States was done away with, while 
Part-C and Part-D States were abolished. After the 
State of Jamnku and kashmir has become a Union 
Territory, we now have 28 States and nine Union 
Territories; the latest addition to the list of union 
territories are J&K and Ladakh, added on 31st October 
2019.
Broadly speaking, in the evolution of Fiscal 
Federalism there has been a marked stability in 
the process and procedures. The annual budgetary 
processes of both the Central and the Federal 
Governments are independent exercises and have to 
go through the Parliament or State Legislature. The 
Finance Commission which was first constituted in 
1951 under Article 280 of the Constitution has had 
an unbroken legacy. It performs the functions broadly 
enshrined in the Article 280 of the Constitution.
Article 280 reads as:
(1) The President shall, within two years from 
the commencement of this Constitution and 
thereafter at the expiration of every fifth 
year or at such earlier time as the President 
considers necessary, by order constitute a 
Finance Commission which shall consist of 
a Chairman and four other members to be 
appointed by the President.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to 
make recommendations to the President as 
to
 (a) the distribution between the Union 
and the States of the net proceeds 
of taxes which are to be, or may be, 
divided between them under this 
Chapter and the allocation between 
the States of the respective shares of 
such proceeds;
 (b) the principles which should govern 
the grants in aid of the revenues of the 
States out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India;
 (c) any other matter referred to the 
Commission by the President in the 
interests of sound finance.
(3) The Commission shall determine their 
procedure and shall have such powers 
in the performance of their functions as 
Parliament may by law confer on them.
For most of the post-independence era, the 
existence of the Planning Commission injected 
centralising dependence in more ways than one. The 
Planning Commission became a parallel institution 
for the transfer of resources from the Union of States. 
While focus of the Finance Commission remained on 
the revenue account, the Planning Commission was 
concerned predominantly with the capital account. 
Successive Finance Commissions commented on this 
as being inconsistent with the spirit of the constitution 
in the devolution of resources. There were other 
developments like the 73rd and 74th amendments of 
the Constitution in 1992 giving status to Panchayat 
Raj institutions and Urban local bodies with specific 
functions assigned to them under the eleventh and 
twelfth schedules.
As a coordinating entity between the Centre and 
the States the two key institutions have remained, the 
National Development Council constituted in 1952 
to oversee the work of the Planning Commission, 
to approve their five year plans and their mid-term 
SPEECH
RBI Bulletin December 2019 23
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
appraisal and the formation of the Inter State Council 
by a Constitutional Amendment in 1990 based on 
the recommendations of the Sarkaria Commission 
Report. The question which I wish to ask myself is 
have Centre-State relations and their dynamics kept 
pace with the changing needs of the time? India has 
changed imperceptibly in its economic policies and 
its governance rubric.
As we look ahead I perceive there are a few key 
challenges.
First and foremost, the future of the VIIth
Schedule. I need to dwell on this a bit. The VIIth
Schedule of the Constitution broadly demarcates 
the functions of the governance into three entities. 
This schedule distributes the legislative and financial 
powers between the Union and the States. List I 
pertain to subjects of the Union, while List II pertains 
to subjects which belong to the States and List III in a 
category called the Concurrent List belong to both the 
Union and the States and in the event of conflicting 
legislation, the law passed by the Union shall prevail.
Over a period of time the Concurrent List has 
sought to occupy increasing space. This is not only 
by the 42nd Amendment of the Constitution (1975), 
which shifted the subjects of forest and education 
from the State List to the Concurrent List.
While this was formal act entirely through 
constitutional amendment there are other ways in 
which the original demarcation was sought to be 
whittled down and often metamorphasized. Take for 
instance the issue of Entitlement driven legislations. 
Some time ago we entered an era of Entitlement 
based Standalone Legislation. The classic examples 
are the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act of 2005, the Right of Children to Free 
and Compulsory Education Act 2009 and the National 
Food Security Act 2013. How do these stand-alone 
entitlement legislations mesh with the VIIth Schedule 
of the Constitution? Do they transgress the earmarked 
borders? And how is it that none of the States, at any 
stage opposed the transgression of these limits. This 
was the area where the fiscal romantics should have 
really intervened as employment, education and food 
were entirely intended to be in the domain of the States. 
The issue of the States autonomy, I scarcely remember 
ever came up for serious analytical critiques. Political 
expediency pervaded Constitutional misgivings.
Second, the issue of incongruence of Article 282 
of the Constitution with the letter and spirit of the 
VIIth Schedule. Article 282 of the Constitution which 
says, ‘The Union or a State may make any grants for 
any public purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose 
is not one with respect to which Parliament or the 
Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make 
laws.’
Originally in the Constitution, it was not 
expected to be an overarching provision but an 
extra-ordinary one to be used very sparingly and If I 
quote Shri K Santhanam, Chairman of the 2nd Finance 
Commission on Article 282, he said - ‘This was not 
intended to be one of the major provisions for making 
readjustments between the Union and the States, 
if that was the idea, then there was no purpose in 
evolving such a complicated set of relations of shares, 
assignments and grants. There is no purpose in having 
two Articles enabling the Centre to assist the States - 
one through the Finance Commission and the other 
by more executive discretion. In the latter case, even 
parliamentary legislation is not needed. Of course, it 
will have to be included in the Budget. But, beyond 
being an item in the Budget, no further sanction need 
to be taken. Therefore, in my view, this Article was 
a residuary, a reserve Article, to enable the Union to 
deal with unforeseen contingencies. That was how 
this Article was used both by the British Government 
and, after transfer of power, before the first year of 
the First Five Year Plan. Under this Article, only some 
grow-more-food grants and some rehabilitation grants 
were given.’
SPEECH
24 RBI Bulletin December 2019
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
N A Palkhivala, Constitutional expert, in his 
opinion given to 9th Finance Commission, opined - 
‘Art. 282 is not intended to enable the Union to make 
such grants as fall properly under Art. 275. Art. 282 
embodies merely a residuary power which enables the 
Union or a State to make any grant for any purpose, 
irrespective of the question whether the purpose is 
one over which the grantor has legislative power.’
The legitimacy of all Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes most of which are in the domain of the 
States emanates from the use or misuse through 
recourse to Article 282. Indeed, raison-de-etre of the 
Planning Commission in many ways emanated from 
excessive use of Article 282 in the plethora, if not the 
jungle of what has come to be known as the Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes. Here again notwithstanding the 
successive attempts to rationalise these schemes, the 
last being under the Committee headed by the former 
Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, Shivraj Singh 
Chauhan, their numbers and diversity remained very 
robust. Based on the internal exercise of the Fifteenth 
Finance Commission there are approx. 211 schemes/ 
sub-schemes under the 29 umbrella core and core of 
the core schemes. Many of these exist masked under 
the so called umbrella schemes. What is even most 
staggering being that the total outlay of the Central 
Government on these Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
is approx. 3.32 lakh crores in 2019-20 BE. Considering 
that the States often protest that these schemes are 
ill designed and not suited to their specific needs 
and entails significant financial outlays by them, no 
State has really decided to abandon them. Far from 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes facing the sunset, some 
large schemes in the shape of Ayushman Bharat, 
Jal Jeevan Mission seek to enlarge their reach and 
diversity.
In the light of the aforesaid analysis what is the 
Forward Path
First, we must recognise that the Indian 
polity has evolved beyond recognition. When the 
constitution was drawn up, the interdependence 
among the States fostered by technology and 
migration had not gathered pace. But the autonomy of 
States in pre-globalised era was vastly different than 
an era where both migration and technology erode in 
perceptively the boundaries for State. While we talk 
of the global value added chain, we forget that there is 
Indian Value Added Chain (IVC). Products, Processes 
and Services commenced in one State could involve 
several States before it reaches the final consumer. 
Indeed, the philosophy of Competitive Federalism, 
the initialisation of Niti Aayog on ranking of States 
emanates from this approach.
The concept of National priorities and notable 
initiatives like Swachh Bharat, New Education Policy, 
Ayushman Bharat, Swachh Jal through Jal Jeevan 
Mission as major initiatives constitute integral part 
of the changing nature of obligations between the 
Centre and the States. The issues of National Priority 
transcend boundaries because they are designed 
to address the basic tenets of growth multiplier 
benefitting every segment of society and addressing 
welfare tenets on health, housing and employment 
as inescapable national priorities. This erodes 
administrative boundaries and their limitations.
View this along with the changes in Part XII of 
the constitution which resulted in the adoption of 
GST designed to make India in one common market 
and entity. In a sense the GST Council which is also 
a constitutional body takes decisions through its 
fitment committee on the rates of the GST tax as both 
the Parliament and State legislatures have assigned 
their financial powers to this Empowered Committee. 
In the States that we have visited being part of Finance 
Commission, the States have often complained that 
the fiscal autonomy has been circumscribed by the 
GST and the room for manoeuvre on revenues had 
been greatly circumscribed. It is a case of pooled 
sovereignty for the Betterment of Common Good. 
Nonetheless, GST Council is still in its nascent phase 
SPEECH
RBI Bulletin December 2019 25
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
and needs to revisit its design and decision making 
process in a more fundamental way. This is also 
necessary to enable it to fulfil its original purpose.
So here are my Five Suggestions for Strengthening 
Fiscal Federalism
First and foremost, the nature of governance has 
changed fundamentally. Is it for instance reasonable 
for any Prime Minister while visiting a State to 
explain that he cannot provide any support for 
drinking water, improved power supply or enhanced 
agriculture because the subject happens to be in List 
II of the VIIth Schedule belonging to the State. This 
is not a practical proposition because Constitution 
must serve and must adopt these to the changing 
expectations of the people.
People invest confidence both at the National 
and State level in the political leadership that seeks to 
garner electoral support. As I mentioned before, the 
nature of polity, technology, increasingly aspirational 
society, the demographic profile and the power of 
technology has dramatically altered the contours of 
the Constitution.
Both in theory and practice, many beliefs and 
principles which prompted our forefathers to give the 
Constitution its present shape may need some basic 
reconsideration. Long before I said this in a report 
submitted in 1971 by a Committee called Rajamannar 
Committee formally known as the Centre-State 
relations Inquiry Committee, said ‘that it is desirable 
to constitute a High Powered Commission consisting 
of eminent lawyers and jurists and elderly statesmen 
with administrative experience to examine the 
entries of List I and List III in the VIIth Schedule of the 
Constitution and suggest redistribution of entries’.
The substantive point is re-look of the VIIth
Schedule in a contemporary context. Unless we 
re-draw the contours of the schedule, some of the 
incongruities between the contours of the VIIth
Schedule and Article 282 of the Constitution and the 
standalone legislation of the subjects primarily will 
remain cluttered and opaque.
Second, the symmetry in the working of the 
GST Council and the Finance Commission deserves 
serious considerations. The Finance commissions 
recommend distribution of revenues between Union 
and the States and thereafter, among the States 
further to the third tier. They look at projections of 
the expenditure and revenue, but issue of GST rates 
exemptions, changes, and implementation of the 
indirect taxes are entirely within the domain of the 
GST Council. This leads to unsettled questions on 
the ways to monitor, scrutinise and optimise revenue 
outcomes. Since both the Finance Commission 
and the GST Council are constitutional bodies, the 
coordination mechanism between the two is now an 
inescapable necessity. For the first five years of the 
GST, a 14 per cent guaranteed compensation by the 
Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to states act) 
2017 is provided to the States.
This arrangement will come to an end in 
2022. But many States are seeking an extension of 
this mechanism thereafter. As far as the Finance 
Commission is concerned, the future roadmap on 
this has a bearing on the recommendations which it 
is expected to make on the likely revenues of States, 
the sustainable growth rates and the Revenue Deficit 
of Grants under Article 275.
Third, its linkage with the first, we need a far 
more credible policy for rationalisation of Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes and Central outlays that have 
been possible so far. Several Committees in the past 
have made attempts to do so but the outcome has been 
elusive. This is even more relevant since the role of 
NITI Aayog, which is primarily a Think Tank institution 
and not a financial body remains somewhat unclear 
in the financial sphere. There is no central entity now 
for an over-view of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
and how many and in what form many of these could 
SPEECH
26 RBI Bulletin December 2019
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
be amalgamated with central sector outlays. We need 
to constitute an Empowered Group of domain experts 
to submit to the Finance Minister and Prime Minister 
on modalities of further and deeper rationalisation of 
these Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
Fourthly, with the abolition of the Planning 
Commission, many economists and policy makers 
have argued about an institutional vacuum. While 
the NDC is performing an important function, the 
States have pleaded for a credible institution acting as 
a link for a policy dialogue with the Centre. In many 
countries of the world like Australia, States came 
together in 2005 to set up the council for the Australian 
federation to jointly represent their interests in 
Canberra. We have an institutional entity and how to 
rejuvenate and rekindle Inter-State Council deserves 
serious consideration.
Fifth area of incongruity is the fiscal story. 
One of the Terms of Reference made to this Finance 
Commission is to review the current level of debt of 
the Union and the States and recommend a fiscal 
consolidation roadmap for sound fiscal management.
As per the amended FRBM Act, the Central 
Government shall take appropriate steps to ensure 
that:
a) The general government debt does not 
exceed 60 per cent;
b) The Central Government debt does not 
exceed 40 per cent of GDP by the end of FY 
2024-25.
c) The Central Government debt is estimated 
at 48.4 per cent as a percentage of GDP 
for 2018-19 RE. It is expected that Central 
Government liabilities will come down to 
48 per cent of GDP in 2019-20 BE.
d) The outstanding liabilities of the State 
Governments stands at 25.1 per cent of 
GSDP in 2017, with a range of 42.8 per cent 
in Punjab and 17 per cent in Chhattisgarh 
(as per the latest RBI Study on State Budgets)
Aligning the Fiscal and Debt path of both the 
Centre and the States is an arduous but inescapable 
task. A differentiated Debt path of States which 
recognises the present constraints and issues of legacy 
debt must be handled with sagacity and sensitivity.
These developments have posed an important 
and challenging task for the Commission to arrive at 
a roadmap for Commission’s award period from 2020 
to 2025.
Reforms in Public Finance Management 
Systems are a continuous process. Previous Finance 
Commissions recommended on various aspects of 
PFM systems of both Union and States with focus 
on budgetary and accounting processes, financial 
reporting, etc.
Conclusion
I do believe that if fresh initiatives are taken on 
some of the suggestions which I have made, it could 
impart new dynamism to Fiscal Federalism. The 
ideology is not in doubt but the practice has become 
increasingly opaque. Setting a new context both on 
ideology, and practice must receive serious attention. 
India of today, its governance matrix, its economic 
quest is vastly different than the India which crafted 
its Constitution in 1950.
Can we re-think the design and structure of a 
genuine fiscal partnership which is not merely a race 
to garner more resources but a creative attempt to 
move towards a vibrant Indian Value Added Chain 
which can catapult our growth rate closer to the 
quest for double digit growth. Times of economic 
slowdown must be viewed anecdotally as they are 
transient in nature and cannot impair our vision 
both on our potential and but more equally to our 
historical compulsions. I believe that, only when we 
recast our ideology in a more contemporary context, 
SPEECH
RBI Bulletin December 2019 27
Fiscal Federalism: Ideology and Practice
the practice will also become more transparent and 
more meaningful.
We would be doing service to L K Jha by, given his 
liberal mind set, seeking better synchronisation and 
symmetry between ideology and practice. Living in a 
deceitful world of one-upmanship either among the 
States or between the States and the Centre will only 
detract our ability to realise India’s growth potential.
In the context of remark that markets may 
remain irrational longer than I can remain solvent, 
John Maynard Keynes is reported to have remarked 
that when facts and circumstances change, I change 
my mind - what do you do?
The facts and circumstances on Fiscal 
Federalism have changed. Time to change our mind.
Thank you