Understanding and Managing
Interest Rate Risk at Banks*
Viral V. Acharya

* The speech was delivered by Dr. Viral V. Acharya, Deputy Governor,
Reserve Bank of India at the FIMMDA Annual Dinner, 2018 organised by
the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India
(FIMMDA) on January 15, 2018 at Hotel Taj Mahal Palace, Mumbai.

SPEECH

8 RBI Bulletin February 2018
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

a significant decline in bank credit spreads with a
corresponding increase in sovereign credit spreads. In
effect, bank bailouts transferred credit risk from the
financial sector to the sovereigns (Acharya, Drechsler
and Schnabl, 2012; 2015). However, and especially

post the Greek default in 2010, sovereign spreads in
the GIIPS widened too over the German Bunds due to
macroeconomic concerns in the European periphery,
causing significant valuation losses for banks and
casting doubt on their solvency.

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin February 2018 9
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

Concomitantly, rising yields on sovereign bonds
enticed banks to stock up on their domestic sovereign
exposures. With continuing access to short-term
funding, notably in deposit and money markets, banks
in GIIPS and even some non-GIIPS countries increased
investments in GIIPS sovereign bonds so as to purchase
“carry” over the German Bunds, hoping for future
convergence of yield (Acharya and Steffen, 2015).
This “carry trade” was particularly attractive for
under-capitalised banks as a way to gamble for
resurrection, effectively chasing quick Treasury gains
with no additional capital requirement, but doubling
up on economic risks if the carry were to widen even
further... and it did. The Greek default and ensuing
sovereign debt crises in the GIIPS countries showed
that banks having significant exposures to sovereign
debt were the most susceptible to fluctuations in
sovereign borrowing costs and faced attendant market
plus funding consequences.

Such sovereign debt-bank nexus creates a two-
way feedback loop. As banks are highly exposed to the

domestic sovereign, any adverse movement in yields
or materialisation of a sovereign event could trigger
bank under-capitalisation and bailouts, which imply

further sovereign borrowing and rising sovereign
yields, leading to further erosion of bank capital
and need for further bailouts, and so on (Acharya,
Drechsler and Schnabl, 2012; 2015).
Understanding and managing well the banking
sector’s exposure to risks embedded in domestic
sovereign debt is thus not just a matter of banking
sector’s profits and capital, but in fact it is one of
overall macroeconomic stability.
The Indian Context
In India, the linkage between sovereign debt and
bank balance sheets has always been strong given
the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) prescriptions for
banks and the historical role that banks have played
in supporting public debt. Banks, under section 24
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, are required
to maintain minimum liquid assets (basically
Government securities – both Central Government
securities or G-Secs, and sub-sovereign securities called
State Development Loans (SDLs)) as a percentage of
Demand and Time Liabilities (DTL). This ratio has
historically been as high as 38.5 per cent, but has
gradually come down to 19.5 per cent now (Chart 2),

SPEECH

10 RBI Bulletin February 2018
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

being brought steadily in line with international levels
of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) under Basel-III.
The resulting large holding of G-Secs and
SDLs by banks exposes them to re-pricing of
governments’ borrowing costs which could rise due to
inflationary, fiscal or other domestic as well as global
macroeconomic developments. I propose to (i) draw
attention to the significance of this interest rate risk
exposure of Indian banks; (ii) urge banks to pay greater
attention and devote more resources to their Treasury
operations; and, (iii) lay out some options available to
banks for managing the risk efficiently.
Understanding Interest Rate Risk at Banks
Let us start by first principles. Interest rate
risk is most simply understood by looking at the
(approximate) price equation for a bond portfolio
when there is a (small) change in the underlying
interest rates, such as the level of government’s
borrowing cost:

∆P = – P × D × ∆Y, where
∆ denotes change; P denotes the
portfolio’s market value;

D denotes the “duration”, a measure of the interest
rate sensitivity of the portfolio; and, Y denotes an
underlying interest rate (or portfolio yield).
In other words, the value of the investment
portfolio is a function of three factors:
a. The size of the portfolio denoted by P;
b. The duration denoted by D, which roughly
captures the weighted average maturity of
cash-flows of bonds in the portfolio; and,
c. The increase in yields denoted by ∆Y.
For example, a portfolio of size 1 trillion with 10
years of duration, falls in value by 10 billion upon a
0.1 per cent or 10 basis points (bps) rise in the 10-year
G-Sec benchmark yield.
Let us consider each of these factors, in turn, in
the present and historical Indian context.

Size of the Portfolio1
The share of commercial banks in outstanding
G-Secs is around 40 per cent (June 2017). Investment
of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) in G-Secs as a
percentage of their total investment was around 82
per cent for FY 2016-17. The corresponding figure for
Public Sector Banks (PSBs) for FY 2016-17 is slightly
higher at 84 per cent. This exposure has noticeably
increased since 2014 (Chart 3a).
In spite of the relative stability of the consolidated
Debt/GDP ratio of the government, the investor base
for G-Secs in India is primarily limited to domestic
institutions. As a result, there are often situations of
oversupply of government bonds relative to demand.
This appears to be the case especially for Indian banks
going by their high excess SLR holdings. One reason
banks end up holding high levels of government
debt is because in the Indian milieu, they end up
as residual holders in case of relative oversupply,
as the appetite of other major institutional investor
categories like insurance and pension funds is limited
by their investment mandates. Another important
reason in recent times has been that excess liquidity
in the banking system did not end up being parked at
the Reserve Bank’s liquidity mop-up operations which
would have kept duration risk minimal. Instead, the
surplus liquidity found its way into G-Secs as domestic
sovereign debt is the most attractive investment for
capital-starved banks looking for short-term gains even
if at the expense of greater duration (as I explained
earlier, this was the case also in the European context).

As a result, the size of banking sector’s balance-
sheet exposure to G-Secs, and hence, its interest rate

risk, is high in an absolute sense, and is relatively
elevated, when measured in proportion to total
1 Government securities are defined under law as both Central Government
securities (G-Secs) and State Development Loans (SDLs). In terms of
management of interest rate risk in the investment book, both are equally
important. In this speech, however, data and charts pertain to only G-Secs
for simplicity. Inclusion of SDLs would not change the broad conclusions,
and as they contribute to interest-rate risk, would only strengthen them.

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin February 2018 11
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

assets, for public sector banks relative to private
banks (Chart 3b).
Duration of investment book and the maturity
structure of G-Secs
The high interest rate exposure of banks from
their G-Sec portfolios is attributable to not only the

size of their holdings, but also to the increasing
maturity of primary issuance. The weighted average
maturity of the stock of Government securities has
increased steadily from 9.66 yrs in 2012-13 to 10.67
yrs in 2017-18 (Chart 4). The average tenor of annual
issuance during the last five years has been high at
around 15 years.

SPEECH

12 RBI Bulletin February 2018
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

What are implications of this changing maturity
structure of G-Secs for the duration of bank investment
portfolios?
The investment portfolio of banks is classified
under three categories, viz., ‘Held to Maturity (HTM)’,
‘Available for Sale (AFS)’ and ‘Held for Trading (HFT)’.
Banks normally hold securities acquired by them with
the intention to hold them up to maturity under HTM
category. Only debt securities are permitted to be held
under HTM with a few exceptions, e.g., equity held in
subsidiaries. Holding securities under HTM provides
cushion for banks from valuation changes. However,
holding in HTM book is subjected to a ceiling.
AFS and HFT categories together form the trading
book of banks. Banks are permitted to decide on the
extent of holdings under AFS and HFT based on their
trading strategy, risk appetite, capital position, etc.
Securities held under both these books are required
to be marked to market. HFT book is required to be
marked to market on a more frequent basis than
AFS. Valuation frequency of investment is typically a
determinant in the composition of investment book
of banks. Correspondingly, shares of HTM, AFS and

HFT are 55.4 per cent, 42.5 per cent and 2.1 per cent,
respectively, as on September 2017 (Financial Stability
Report, RBI, December 2017). The average modified
duration of the AFS book of banks is currently around
2.9 years. The comparable figure for PSBs is higher at
3.5 years and for private sector banks is at 2.0 years.
With relatively high duration and concentration
of G-Secs in investment portfolio, bank earnings
and capital remain exposed to adverse yield moves,
especially as the share of investment income has
been on the rise in the last five years. Chart 5 captures
this fact succinctly that investment income of banks
is highly sensitive to G-Sec yields – yields had by
and large fallen in recent years, and consequently,
investment income went up. In turn, and given the
muted credit growth over this period, especially at
PSBs, investment income has again started playing a
rather important role in determining bank earnings.
Movement in yields – Phases of sustained yield rise
G-Sec yields in India have undergone episodic
phases of sustained rise of close to 200 bps at regular
intervals. Chart 6 identifies three major phases for the
10-year benchmark yield over the past 15 years:

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin February 2018 13
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

a. Phase I – second half of 2004 when interest
rate cycle turned up from 5.00 per cent to
over 7.00 per cent, following a prolonged
rally;
b. Phase II – post the global financial crisis
when yields rose from around 5.25 per cent
in December 2008 to around 8.80 per cent by
November 2011; and,
c. Phase III – during the taper tantrum episode
when yields rose from around 7.25 per cent
at end-May 2013 to just below 9 per cent by
end-December 2013;
My point in showing this time-series and episodic
phases of G-Sec yield movements is that banks should
not be surprised repeatedly when government bond
yields rise sharply and their investment profits drop.
RBI’s Financial Stability Reports (FSR) have regularly
pointed out the impact of such large interest rate
moves on capital and profitability of banks. Banks
should know and understand this risk rather well.
Perhaps they do, and the issue is really one of
incentives that lead to their ignoring this risk, which I
will turn to next.

Heads I Win, Tails the Regulator Dispenses
How have these episodic phases of sustained rise in
G-Sec yield played out?
During Phase I, responding to the clamour for
regulatory forbearance, banks were permitted to hold
G-Secs up to the mandated Statutory Liquidity Ratio
(SLR) of 25 per cent of Demand and Time Liabilities
(DTL) under the Held to Maturity (HTM) accounting
category. Regulation also enabled banks to shift
securities from other accounting categories into the
HTM category, as a one-time measure, a feature that
has now acquired an annual dimension.
A similar one-time transfer was extended during
Phase III, in addition to deferment in recognition of
valuation losses by six months, from September 2013
to March 2014.
The impact of the persistent rise in yields during
Phase II was eased to a great degree by regular open
market purchases by RBI, which are typically employed
for durable liquidity management and to ensure the
proximity of money market rates to the overnight
policy rate, rather than for management of long-term
G-Sec yields.

SPEECH

14 RBI Bulletin February 2018
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

These are also the sort of measures some banks
have again requested Reserve Bank to adopt in the
current phase of rising yields, wherein yields have
moved up from around 6.50 per cent at end-August
2017 to around 7.45 per cent now.
Interest rate risk of banks cannot be managed
over and over again by their regulator. The regulator,
in interest of financial stability, is caught in such
situations between a rock and a hard place, and
often obliges. However, the trend of regular use of
ex post regulatory dispensation to ease the interest
rate risk of banks is not desirable from the point of
view of efficient price discovery in the G-Sec market
and effective market discipline on the G-Sec issuer.
Nor does it augur well for developing a sound risk
management culture at banks. Recourse to such
asymmetric options – heads I win, tails the regulator
dispenses – is akin to the use of steroids. They get
addictive and have long-term adverse effects in
the form of frequent relapse even though their use
may be justified to relieve occasional intense pain.
Hence, it would be better for the banking system to
build its own immunity and strength, i.e., emphasise
internally – and put in place processes for – efficient
management of interest-rate risk.2
Let me then discuss what could be done by banks
to achieve this.

Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks
Management of the increasing interest rate
exposure of the banking system needs to address
both sides of the sovereign-bank nexus. While the
long-term investor participation in government bond
market needs to be deepened – both domestically
and internationally, and the maturity structure of
government debt kept sensitive to implications for
bank balance-sheets, banks also need to manage the
interest rate risk on the balance sheet by dynamically
managing its size and duration as well as accessing
markets for risk transfer.
The desirable options follow from the bond price
equation I presented earlier:
∆P = – P × D × ∆Y.

Interest rate risk management options can thus
be categorised as follows:
a. Measures that address P, viz., the G-Sec
portfolio size of banks;
b. Measures that address D, viz., the duration
risk; and,
c. Measures that address the valuation impact
in scenarios with potentially large changes in
yield.
Measures that address the G-Sec portfolio size of
banks
The size of the G-Sec portfolio of banks is mainly
a function of balance sheet choices made by banks
among competing assets. Recognising at the outset
that G-Sec portfolio is subject to interest rate risk, a
risk-management strategy can be put in place along
the following lines:
1. The bank’s Board in discussions with the
Treasury head and Chief Risk Officer (CRO)
can approve the risk limit for the portfolio
in terms of the capital that can be put at

2 There are other reasons for banks to focus more closely on interest rate
risk that I haven’t touched upon in interest of simplicity and brevity. For
instance, banks face not just the interest rate risk of the investment portfolio
but also to the risk in the banking book. The present guidelines require
banks in India to compute change in economic value of equity (ΔEVE) and
net interest income (ΔNII) for the entire balance sheet and not just for the
banking book positions. However, in order to promote global consistency,
transparency and comparability of interest rate risk in the banking book
(IRRBB) with that of global banks, banks would be required going forward
to compute IRRBB separately and disclose it based on revised BCBS standards.
Similarly, the Report of RBI’s Internal Study Group to Review the Working
of the Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending Rate (MCLR) System has
recommended that floating rate loans be referenced to an external
benchmark. Once introduced, this would expose banks to higher market
risk, necessitating more active management of interest rate risks.

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin February 2018 15
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

risk. This assigned risk capital, much like a
corporate budget, should transform into a
risk strategy and be guarded in a manner that
adjusts for changing risks rather than merely
serving as an easy-to-game compliance limit.
2. The assigned risk capital should not get
wiped out under reasonable stress scenarios,
which can be modelled as high confidence
level tail events for bond yields under value
at risk or expected loss approach. In other
words, banks should not lose capital allocated
to the Treasury function other than with an
extremely small likelihood.
3. Given the non-linearity in yield movements
(the risk that risk will change, or in other
words, yield volatility being stochastic), as
manifested in the episodic volatility phases I
showed, banks should also factor in historical
stress scenarios. Under these historical stress
tests as well, capital allocated to the Treasury
function should not get wiped out.
4. In addition, banks should conduct reverse
stress tests, i.e., ask the question as to what
kind of G-Sec yield movements, parallel shift
at a minimum but ideally also yield-curve
steepening, would wipe out the allocated
capital? Indeed, such reverse stress tests have
been recommended by the Reserve Bank
and could become part of Board-level risk
discussions.
5. However, no stress test is perfect; and, no
risk measure such as value at risk or expected
losses which use historical distributions can
anticipate fully the nature of future yield
movements. Hence, banks also need to adopt
robust risk controls for resilience. This can
involve concentration limits, so banks do not
exceed their exposure to G-Secs beyond an
internally agreed total proportion of assets;

or the excess SLR should be commensurate in
risk terms with the bank’s capital allocation
for investments.
6. In order to further address Treasury-level
incentive issues, banks may consider
imposing dynamic stop loss limits. In order
to avoid further losses once they exceed
a particular percentage of assigned risk
capital, any risk addition must slow down,
potentially even stop (depending on the
extent of realised capital loss), and not be
gerrymandered through security rotation or
by senior management turning a blind eye.
Instead, the realised losses and residual
risks should escalate through CRO to the
bank Board and the risk in the investment

portfolio gradually scaled down in a time-
bound manner depending on its size.

7. In addition, there should be ex-post settling
up as a career incentive for the Treasury
head and all significant risk-takers: those
who swing bank investment portfolio for
the fences and put bank capital at excessive
limits relative to the approved levels should
be held accountable when their bets go bad
due to poor or no risk management. Not all
volatility is due to “black swan” events that
deserve risk-takers being carried through.
8. Finally, there is usually an uninspiring chatter
every time G-Sec yields show a sustained rise
that the market is irrational in its movements.
Not only is it not difficult to separate rational
market movements from irrational ones at
high frequency, such proclamations are a
sign that those betting on government bonds
while chatting such are clueless about the
drivers of market movements. Isn’t that a
good time for the bank senior management
to rein in their Treasury portfolio risks?

SPEECH

16 RBI Bulletin February 2018
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

None of this is rocket science but does require
at the highest level of bank governance mechanisms
a recognition of interest rate risk, an incentive to
manage it, and a top-down organisational strategy to
implement it.
Measures that address the duration risk of banks
How may banks better manage their duration risk?
The efficiency with which this risk is currently
managed leaves a lot to be desired. While duration
risk management is constrained by the G-Secs issuer’s
choice of maturity structure and liquidity in the
secondary bond market, the risk can be managed
more nimbly by also availing of hedging markets. PSBs
account for about 70.6 per cent of the banking sector
assets. However, their participation in such hedging
markets is limited or negligible. While their share in
secondary market trading of G-Secs is about 33 per
cent, their share in hedging activity in the Interest Rate
Swap (IRS) and Interest Rate Future (IRF) segments is
only 4.61 per cent and 13.40 per cent, respectively.
Let me elaborate. RBI introduced Rupee interest
rate derivatives in the OTC market, viz., Interest
Rate Swaps (IRS) and Forward Rate Agreement
(FRA), in 1999. Interest Rate Futures (IRFs) were first
introduced in the Indian markets in 2003 but only the
current bond future contract, introduced in 2014, has
seen reasonable activity. Liquidity in the interest rate
products has generally been low. The open interest
and daily volume in the interest rate futures market
are usually between `20-30 billion while the daily
volume in the Overnight Indexed Swap (OIS) interest
rate swap market is around `150 billion. Besides, only
a section of the banks are active in the OIS market.
Compared to an average daily bond market volume of
`400-500 billion, interest rate derivative markets are
thus rather thin.
Wider participation by banks in interest rate
derivative markets – both futures and swaps – is
necessary for improving liquidity in these markets,

which is necessary for banks to off-load their
significant duration risk onto others. As more hedgers
access these markets, there would be incentives
for market makers to allocate more capital to these
activities, kicking off a virtuous cycle of interest rate
risk-sharing and leading over time to a more vibrant
derivative market.
In other words, the Treasury functions at banks
need to be modernised with urgency, subjected to
careful scrutiny by Boards, overlaid with prudent risk
management practices, and trained to employ hedging
instruments specifically targeted at managing interest
rate risk.
This takes me to the important issue of how
banks should manage large changes in yields.
Measures that manage the impact of potentially large
changes in yield
Given the nascent stage of our interest rate
derivative markets, banks need to manage exposures
to large changes in yield with a multitude of
instruments and trading platforms. All options should
be on the table. An oft-cited reason for the lack of
such comprehensive risk management by banks is
that hedging markets that can enable neutralisation
of large changes in yield lack the size or depth or
liquidity to meet the needs of large banks. True as
this argument is at some level, it is the very lack of
participation by large banks that makes these markets
illiquid and small. RBI systematically engages with the
market to take necessary steps to create an enabling
environment for markets to develop – creating trading,
settlement and reporting infrastructure; introducing
products; easing processes; etc.
India’s G-Sec market infrastructure is arguably
the best in the world. We have enabled guaranteed
settlement in G-Secs, forex and interest rate swaps.
Despite the existence of the facility to short sell and
availability of futures and swap markets, it appears
that for most banks investment activity essentially

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin February 2018 17
Understanding and Managing Interest Rate Risk at Banks

consists of two steps – buying and hoping for the best.
But hope should not be a Treasury desk’s primary
trading strategy.
RBI has also permitted money market futures
about a year back. Those directions were a significant
deviation from the earlier prescriptive approach.
Exchanges were given complete freedom to design
and introduce products. We are yet to receive any
proposal for approval.
Similarly, interest rate options were also
permitted sometime back, but market has still not
kicked off. Years back RBI introduced the When Issued
market and Separate Trading of Registered Interest
and Principal Securities (STRIPS), but neither has
gained traction.
Does all this imply that these interest rate
products have no use for any participant? Or is it just
that the market, dominated by banks, is not used to
availing of risk management options, hoping instead
for regulatory forbearance when episodic yield
increase rears its ugly head?
Conclusion
Let me summarize. Market liberalisation does not
just involve the regulator easing business processes,
introducing new products and creating new markets;
it also requires participants to take initiative to reskill
themselves for constantly evolving market conditions
and products. Market development is a two-way
interactive process between market participants and
regulators. We are hoping that FIMMDA can rally
banks and play its part going forward.

Finally, it is encouraging that FIMMDA is
developing the code of conduct covering its members’
activities in the interest rate markets. Along with
Foreign Exchange Dealers’ Association of India’s
(FEDAI’s) recent adoption of the Global Foreign
Exchange Code, the entire range of bond, currency
and related derivative markets would be subject to
professional conduct in line with best international
practice, once FIMMDA adopts the code. I hope that
this process can be hastened and FIMMDA members
adopt the code signing it on a public website by the
end of the current quarter.