article
RBI Bulletin January 2019 31
Business Sentiments and Expectations in 2017-18
expectations index (BEI), which summarises the 
outlook for the quarter ahead. Empirically, it has 
been shown that the BEI has statistically significant 
explanatory power in explaining the behaviour of 
manufacturing activity in India (Lekshmi and Mall, 
2015; RBI June 2017). 
Against this backdrop, the motivation driving this 
article is two-pronged. First, it seeks to consolidate and 
distil the key messages emanating from sentiments in 
the manufacturing sector in 2017-18 that were polled 
in four rounds of the survey conducted during the 
year. The focus of interest is to assess by hindsight 
how closely the survey reflected underlying activity in 
a year, marked by inflexions in the evolution of GVA 
in manufacturing and gross fixed capital formation 
alongside an acceleration in corporate sales growth 
and a pick-up in capacity utilisation. Second, the article 
attempts to bring greater precision in predicting the 
near-term outlook by addressing limitations of the BEI 
such as time-invariant weighting. Drawing on these 
efforts, it proposes a dynamic factor index (DFI) which 
improves forecasting performance in respect of the 
BEI, at least in nowcasting manufacturing GVA growth 
and manufacturing WPI inflation. 
The rest of the article is structured in five sections. 
Section 2 examines the cross-country experience in 
business tendency / industrial outlook surveys with a 
view to place the RBI’s IOS against the perspectives of 
international practices. Section 3 presents an overview 
of the stylised facts on key parameters of manufacturing 
conditions that were surveyed in the IOS during 
2017-18. Section 4 sets out an alternative approach to 
forecast/ nowcast manufacturing GVA growth, with 
efficiency and stability gains, outperforming the BEI 
in predictive power. Section 5 concludes with some 
policy perspectives. 
2. Cross-Country Practices 
Business tendency / sentiments / outlook / 
expectations surveys are regularly conducted in 
This article presents the major findings of the industrial 
outlook survey (IOS) of the manufacturing sector conducted 
during 2017-18. The survey revealed a steady improvement 
in demand conditions with a stable outlook. The sentiments 
on input costs, especially of raw materials, remained a 
concern; leading to limited pass-through as reflected by 
upturn in respect of selling prices. Dynamic factor indices 
derived from the survey data were found to be useful in 
tracking the movements of the gross value added (GVA) 
growth and wholesale price index (WPI) inflation of the 
manufacturing sector.
Introduction
Industrial / business outlook surveys are 
extensively employed, particularly by central banks, 
to capture snapshots of sentiment on current activity 
conditions in a forward-looking manner so as to 
follow and analyse economic developments on a more 
frequent basis with information that has the advantage 
of being instantaneously accessible, never being 
subjected to revision (Hansson and Jansson, 2003; 
Kevin and Rosewall, 2015; Amstad and Etter, 2000). The 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been an early mover 
among emerging market economies (EMEs) in this 
genre of surveys. Its flagship industrial outlook survey 
(IOS) goes back to 1998 and the continuum of survey 
rounds conducted since then yields a rich information 
set of 81 data conglomerations of quarterly frequency 
over 20 years. Aggregating the responses received, 
the IOS produces a business assessment index (BAI), 
which encapsulates current conditions and a business 
* Jugnu Ansari and S. Majumdar, Division of Enterprise Surveys, 
Department of Statistics and Information Management (DSIM). The views 
expressed in the article are those of the authors only. The latest round of 
the survey data was released on October 5, 2018 on the RBI’s website at 
https://rbi.org.in/scripts/PublicationsView.aspx?Id=18713. The previous 
article was published in the June 2017 issue of the RBI Bulletin and can be 
accessed at https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_ViewBulletin.aspx?Id=16933.
Business Sentiments and 
Expectations in 2017-18*
32
developed economies, including, the USA, the UK, 
Japan and other member countries of the Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 
transition economies of Central / Eastern Europe and 
in the countries of the Asia-Pacific region. In many 
countries, multiple surveys to gauge the assessment 
of underlying macroeconomic and financial conditions 
by businesses themselves are prevalent (Table 1). 
International agencies, such as, the OECD, the 
European Union, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
and the United Nations Economic and Social Council 
for Asia and Pacific (ESCAP), have been working 
towards harmonisation of these surveys in order to 
facilitate co-ordination and cross-country comparison. 
Indicators available from such surveys are found to 
be useful in the construction of lead indicators for 
business cycle analysis (Hansson and Jansson, 2003) 
and for developing summary gauges of the short-term 
outlook. 
Most inflation targeting countries1
 have 
maximum coverage of demand and price parameters in 
their surveys which are considered worthy of national 
representation. The iconic manufacturing business 
outlook survey conducted by the Philadelphia Federal 
Reserve Bank is intended to capture manufacturing 
conditions in the north eastern USA, but it is widely 
regarded as reflecting a country-wide assessment2
. 
Apart from central banks, the national statistical 
offices also conduct business tendency surveys. 
In Brazil, the Survey of Manufacturing Industry 
has several similarities with the Indian experience. It 
is a qualitative survey conducted monthly. Its results 
are used to identify a lead indicator about the state 
of the economy with respect to the business outlook. 
In Canada, a similar survey is conducted with the 
same frequency by the regional offices of the Bank of 
Canada. They target the senior management of select 
firms based on their contribution in gross domestic 
product. The balance of opinion is estimated in a 
range between -100 and +100, again resonating with 
the RBI’s IOS. Indonesia conducts a business tendency 
survey which is widely intended for its sheer breadth 
of coverage, on quarterly basis to obtain information 
related to a wide array of business conditions, such 
as business revenue, production capacity utilisation, 
employment, average working hours, domestic and 
overseas demand. The survey covers a sample of 2500 
Table 1: Cross Country Experience of Industrial Outlook Surveys
Business Tendency Survey 
Parameters
Australia Brazil Canada France Germany India Indonesia Japan New 
Zealand
South 
Africa
United 
Kingdom
United 
States
Conducted since year 1966 1995 1998 1959 1961 1998 2002 1957 1961 1986 1977 1968 
Composite Indicator (BEI) 