Regulation and Financial
Stability*
N.S.Vishwanathan

*
The speech was delivered by Shri N.S.Vishwanathan, Deputy Governor,
Reserve Bank of India at the Special Session of Merchant Chamber of
Commerce and Industry on October 13, 2017 in Kolkata.

SPEECH

6 RBI Bulletin January 2018
Regulation and Financial Stability

system, the extent of interconnectedness and possible
sources of vulnerabilities that could impact fi nancial
stability.
Systemic risk assessment is crucial to understand
vulnerabilities of the fi nancial system. This meant that
apart from ensuring the strength of fi nancial institutions,
it is necessary to assess the resilience of the system to
various economic shocks. Globally, therefore, Central
Banks embarked on system-wide stress tests under
plausible but severe economic conditions. The RBI
undertakes such stress tests and the results are
published in the Financial Stability Report. The Reserve
Bank also requires banks to conduct stress tests and
use the results for their internal capital assessment.
I began by saying that a set of strong fi nancial
institutions may not necessarily lead to financial
stability. While strong and resilient fi nancial institutions
may not be suffi cient condition for fi nancial stability,
it is a necessary condition. It is, therefore, well
recognised that a resilient financial system, more
particularly banking system, would be critical for
fi nancial stability and to an extent acts as a bulwark
against fi nancial instability arising from other channels.
As such, apart from various other efforts to prevent the
fi nancial crisis of the kind witnessed in 2007-08, the
G20 mandated the Basel Committee for Banking
Supervision (BCBS) to put in place appropriate regulatory
framework that helps the banking system to be strong
and resilient. The crisis called for changes in the global
financial architecture as also the institutional
architecture for making regulations. This resulted in
the BCBS being expanded to cover the G20 countries
which made India a member of the BCBS and the
Financial Stability Board. No doubt, as Dr Subba Rao
has mentioned in his famous book, India and other
EME nations are generally perceived to have a vote but
not a voice. But slowly these are changing and the EMEs’
views are also being heard to an extent. The BCBS, in
response to the mandate given by the G20 developed

new regulations which are now commonly referred to
as Basel III regulations.
To understand the basic foundations of the
changes to the regulatory framework that the Basel III
rules put in place, it would be useful to delineate the
fundamental issues that characterised the fi nancial
system during the crisis in advanced economies.
(a) High leverage of the banking system was
masked by high CRAR. The banks reported
high CRAR by bundling low quality assets
into highly rated securitised papers which
enabled them to report a high CRAR while
remaining over leveraged.
(b) Excessive dependence on market borrowings
to fund and refi nance their assets; supply of
liquidity dried when mortgage backed
securities were downgraded due to defaults
in the underlying assets.
(c) Use of subsidiaries (in a way shadow banking
entities) to undertake activities that might
have been more regulated if carried out
within the bank, thus creating regulatory
arbitrage.
(d) The loss absorbing capacity of the capital was
weak given that at least 50 per cent of the
capital could be non-loss absorbing in nature
(Tier II).
(e) Too big to fail banks required bailout with
public funds. Therefore, there had to be a
cost for an entity becoming too large and
interconnected.
(f) The reliance on credit ratings resulted in
potential under-capitalisation.
(g) Many banks had adopted internal rating
based system (IRB) for determining their
capital requirements for credit risk; the IRB
essentially depended on models. Therefore
the entire balance sheet was exposed to
model risk.

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin January 2018 7
Regulation and Financial Stability

In this background, let us look at the major changes
that Basel III brought about:
1. It was found necessary that the quality and
quantity of capital should be improved to
enable the banks and the banking system to
have higher loss absorbency and greater
resilience to emerging risks. Therefore, the
regulatory capital regime brought in three
fundamental changes:
(a) It was prescribed that out of 8 per cent
CRAR, at least 4.5 per cent shall be
common equity Tier-I with complete loss
absorbency.

(b) Two additional buffers in the form of
capital conservation buffer of 2.5 per
cent and counter cyclical capital buffer
of another 2.5 per cent were prescribed.
Capital conservation buffer could be run
down in times of crisis with restriction
on earnings distribution.

(c) The banks were allowed to issue
additional Tier I (AT1) bonds but with
stronger loss absorbing features.
2. A framework to identify too big to fail banks
globally and domestically was drawn up. The
GSIBs (globally systemically important banks)
and the DSIBs (domestically systemically
important banks) were required to hold
varying degrees of additional capital with a
view to avoiding use of public funds for their
revival, in case they fail and also to prevent
excessive growth in their balance sheet. The
GSIBs were also required to issue TLAC (total
loss absorbing capacity) instruments which
can be converted into equity in times of need.
3. As I mentioned earlier, one of the features
of the banking system during the crisis was

excessive dependence on market borrowings
for funds. The fi rst trigger of the crisis was
inability of one of the banks to fi nance its
liabilities because of the downgrading of the
underlying assets. Strangely at that time,
there were no liquidity standards globally
except on the need to have an asset liability
management system. The BCBS realised that
lack of liquidity could singe a bank and hurtle
it towards insolvency. Therefore, liquidity
standards were prescribed as part of the Basel
III reforms. These are - liquidity coverage
ratio (LCR) and the net stable funding ratio
(NSFR). The LCR ensures that the bank had
adequate high quality liquid assets to meet
demand on its liabilities in stressed conditions
for a period of 30 days. The NSFR required
that banks hold a minimum amount of stable
funding based on the liquidity characteristics
of their assets and their activities over one
year horizon. This will reduce funding and
roll over risk. Thanks to our SLR requirements,
the Indian banks do not have any diffi culty
in meeting the LCR requirements.
4. The density of highly rated paper on the asset
side enabled banks to mask their high
leverage with high CRAR. With the quality of
the assets getting downgraded, the inadequacy
of capital came to the fore. With a view to
obviating this possibility, the Basel Committee
prescribed a leverage ratio. What it meant is
that even if the entire assets of a bank were
zero risk weighted, which under the sole
CRAR regime would have enabled infi nite
leverage, there would be constraint now.
5. Several regulatory changes were brought on
securitisation. The changes involved laying
down a framework for simple, transparent
and standardised (STS) securitisation. Higher

SPEECH

8 RBI Bulletin January 2018
Regulation and Financial Stability

capital was prescribed for securitisation
transaction that do not conform to STS
framework with a view to prevent non-true
sale being taken out of the banks’ balance
sheet and also for strengthening capital
requirement for such deals.
6. The Basel Committee is also moving towards
eliminating, as far as possible, use of internal
model based approach to determine capital
requirement. This is happening in three ways
(a) Barring the use of IRB for several types of
exposures; (b) strengthening the standardised
approach and (c) prescribing the regulatory
fl oor where IRB is used, so that the possibility
of under capitalisation on account of risk
from the use of models is minimised.
Apart from these, there were other changes
including on market risk, which I believe I
need not elaborate here.
Financial stability cannot be achieved through
mere strong regulations. They need to be
supplemented by effective supervision. In
the pre-crisis days a light touch regulatory
and supervisory approach was in vogue in
many jurisdictions. As such, regulation were
more ‘comply or explain’ and supervision
less intense. These light touch regulatory and
supervisory practices were also seen as a
reason for weakness in the banking system.
The global crisis changed all that and there
is a move towards more hands-on regulation
and intense supervision. In India, though,
the Reserve Bank has been hands-on, both
for regulation and supervision much before.
7. We have adopted Basle III regulations in India
and in line with the global time-table, have
required the banks to migrate to Basle III fully
by March 31, 2019. Whenever we talk of

banking regulation in India, there is a view
expressed that we apply stricter norms than
what global standards require. Among the
issues raised to buttress this contention, is
the oft repeated reference to the stipulation
of 9 per cent CRAR as opposed to 8 per cent
specifi ed by the Basel rules. I must clarify
here, as brought out in detail in one of the
Working Papers1

, this is not really so.
Fundamentally, among other factors, the one
percentage point higher CRAR is also to
calibrate the regulatory capital to the Indian
conditions, having regard to the features of
exposures assigned a particular credit rating
being different from those of similarly rated
exposures internationally. Let me point out
here that the regulatory capital is essentially
for meeting unexpected loss. Therefore, such
a calibration is required. For those interested,
I would suggest that you please read the
paper I referred to. Incidentally, the higher
CET-1 ratio of 5.5 per cent as opposed to 4.5
per cent, another oft referred ‘deviation’, is
only a derivative of the 9 per cent CRAR.
8. Another area where our regulations are
referred to as steeper than the standards is
the need to maintain both SLR and LCR. As
you would be aware, we have gradually
reduced the SLR and also allowed 11 per cent
of the SLR to count for LCR as well, thus
softening the impact. Moreover, we have to
do this in a calibrated manner particularly
with a view to avoiding instability arising
through upward movement in the
Government securities’ yield if SLR is lowered
abruptly.
1
RBI working paper series 2017 - Risk-weighting under Standardised
Approach of Computation of Capital for Credit Risk in Basel Framework
– An Analysis of Default Experience of Credit Rating Agencies in India.

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin January 2018 9
Regulation and Financial Stability

9. We have required banks to implement the
leverage ratio and have indicated that we
would be monitoring them at a ratio of 4.5.
This is more with a view to enabling banks
to take corrective actions well before they get
overleveraged even by the global standards
as also to mandate banks not to exceed the
present system wide average leverage ratio.
10. It is natural for business to move from the
strongly regulated to the less regulated
space. Therefore, as the banking system was
more regulated, fi rms moved into the less
r e g u l a t e d s p a c e . W h e n f i n a n c i a l
intermediation happens in a less regulated
or unregulated environment, even more
particularly with banks using the subsidiary
model to do so, they impact the fi nancial
system substantially. Shadow banking
entities are defined as financial
intermediaries involved in facilitating
creation of credit without being subject to
regulatory oversight. It can also refer to
unregulated activities of regulated entities.
Globally, therefore, the move to intensify
the micro and macro prudential regulation
for banks was complemented by an effort
to get a better handle on the shadow
banking system. The effort has been in the
direction of mapping the shadow banking
entities and containing regulatory arbitrage.
The Reserve Bank also participates in this
exercise undertaken by the Financial
Stability Board and provides necessary
information to it. The non-banking fi nancial
companies in the Indian context which
provide fi nancial intermediation services
are regulated fairly strongly both in terms
of minimum capital and the loan delinquency
recognition.

11. It was also observed that during the crisis,
the accounting framework, particularly for
recognition of fair value of financial
instruments resulted in the financial
statements not refl ecting true and fair picture
of the financial institutions. Globally
therefore, there is a move towards adopting
international fi nancial reporting standards
(IFRS) as a basis for recording the balance
sheet and profi t and loss account. In India

too, we are moving towards adoption of Ind-
AS as the accounting framework for banks

and we are in dialogue with the stakeholders
on the way forward.
12. Of late, vulnerability of fi nancial institutions
to the threat of cyber risk has grown
enormously. This has resulted from the use
of technology by banks gaining momentum
in the recent past. Susceptibility to cyber risk
endangers not only a fi nancial institution but
can have system wide ramifi cations. Cyber
risks take the form of theft of funds, data,
corruption of the IT systems, which might
prevent normal operations. Globally,
therefore, inadequate cyber security is fl agged
as a serious threat to financial stability.
Reserve Bank, realising the importance of
putting in place a robust cyber risk
management framework, has issued detailed
regulations to banks in this regard. Reserve
Bank has set up an IT subsidiary, Reserve
Bank Information Technology Pvt. Ltd. to
assist it to put in place appropriate cyber risk
management regulations and assess the
quality of the IT systems of the regulated
entities as part of the supervisory exercise.
13. It has been found that in India the NPAs as
a percentage of total exposure is higher in
larger accounts. A highly leveraged corporate

SPEECH

10 RBI Bulletin January 2018
Regulation and Financial Stability

sector will pose systemic risk. Globally there
is a move to contain large exposure and we
have aligned our large exposure norms with
the global standards. Moreover, with a view
to de-risking the banks’ balance sheets and
encouraging large borrowers to access the
capital market, we have provided for higher
risk weights for larger borrowers in certain
circumstances.
14. I referred to the use of macro prudential tools
for strengthening fi nancial stability. RBI has
used such tools even before it was fashionable.
Prescribing higher standard assets
provisioning and higher risk weights for
exposure against assets susceptible to market
bubbles is an example. We have, therefore,
higher risk weights for capital market
exposure and commercial real estate,
additional capital for un-hedged foreign
currency exposure, etc. Another macro
prudential tool that is used is the loan to value
ratio (LTV), particularly in mortgage loans.
15. The Reserve Bank has also taken a number
of measures to address systemic risks arising
out of interconnectedness in the fi nancial
system. These, inter-alia include -prudential
limits on aggregate interbank liabilities and
cross-holdings, restrictions on exposures to
complex activities and products, monitoring
of fi nancial conglomerates, monitoring of
common exposures (sensitive sectors),
enhancing transparency and risk mitigation
in OTC transactions through trade repositories
and Central Counterparties (CCPs) and
strengthening the regulatory and supervisory
framework for non-banking fi nancial entities.
16. When one speaks about the Indian banking
system, the stressed assets issue comes to

the fore. Undoubtedly, the problem of
stressed assets in the banking system in India
in general and the public sector banks in
particular, is a matter of serious concern. The
asset quality review undertaken in 2015-16
enabled a proper recognition of the stress in
the banks’ balance sheet and now we are in
the process of providing for them adequately.
As my colleague Dr Viral Acharya has pointed
out in his recent lecture2

, there is strong
evidence of high correlation between bank
balance sheet strength and credit growth. The
impact of the weak balance sheet of the PSBs
is very evident in the form of considerably
lower growth in credit as compared to private
sector banks and foreign banks. We are
examining various ways of strengthening the
capital of PSBs so that they are able to
increase their lending and thus, support
economic growth. Apart from the correlation
that Dr Acharya referred to, I believe that
strong balance sheet also enables the bank
to deal better with stressed assets. Capital
constraints, apart from other factors, lead to
delay in recognition of stress or sub-optimal
re-structuring rather than initiating timely
action that might provide better value to the
banking system and economy in general. This

is because, ever-greening, unviable re-
structuring often postpones the right solution

and attenuates the problem. In this context,
provisioning system akin to global standards
based on expected loss model, would be a
way forward.
We do see a major push towards resolution of the
large stressed assets through their reference under the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC). As you are
2
Speech delivered at the 8th R K Memorial Lecture organised by the Indian
Institute of Banking and Finance at Mumbai on September 7, 2017

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin January 2018 11
Regulation and Financial Stability

already aware, under the additional powers given to
the RBI, through amendment to the BR Act, we have in
June 2017, directed banks to refer 12 cases under IBC
and a few more thereafter. The 12 cases are under
various stages under the National Company Law
Tribunal (NCLT) and we believe a strong insolvency and
bankruptcy code will improve the credit quality and
lower the loss given default of the credit portfolio of
banks. This may take some time but I am sure that
going forward it will enable the banking system to be
placed on a fi rmer footing with regard to their resilience
in general and their readiness to lend further in
particular.
In this context again, it is commented that the
provisioning norms stipulated by the RBI for stressed
assets or for cases referred under IBC is stiffer than
required. Let me explain the logic for the provisioning
requirement for cases referred under IBC. Normally
cases that are referred under IBC are likely to be
those which could not be restructured outside the
IBC. The S4A, which is a scheme for restructuring
of stressed assets, envisages the minimum
sustainable debt to be 50 per cent. It is therefore
only logical that provision made for cases referred
under IBC is atleast 50 per cent. This is not to say
that the reference to IBC would result in recovery
of 50 per cent or less. Provisioning is for expected
loss and banks can write back in case the recoveries
are higher than what the provision envisaged.
Moreover, the provisioning for NPAs by the banks
in India needs to be substantially higher to be
comparable with global practices in this regard.
Before I close, let me respond to a couple of issues
that were fl agged by the earlier speakers and I have
not yet covered. There was a reference to the high
interest rate charged by the bank and a suggestion of
regulating the same. We must all agree that the days
of regulator’s specifi ed interest rates are well behind
us and any move in that direction including in the

form of ‘spreads’ will be market unfriendly. However,
what we are aiming at, is transparency in interest rate
determination and proper transmission of Monetary
Policy decisions. The move from Base Rate to Marginal
Cost of Funds based Lending Rate (MCLR) was to avoid
the average masking the marginal changes in the cost
of funds. However, as pointed out in the ‘Report of
the Internal Study Group to Review the Working of
the MCLR System’, external benchmark as the basis
of determining customers’ interest rate has been
suggested. This will make interest rate determination
more transparent. Competition is the only way to
ensure that the ‘spreads’ are reasonable. On this, as
you are aware, Reserve Bank recently licenced two
new Universal Banks and 10 Small Finance Banks
(SFBs). We have also put the Universal bank licencing
‘on tap’.
The second issue was with reference to fi nancing
for MSMEs. Here again, I would like to point out that
the Reserve Bank has put in place an ecosystem that
facilitate fl ow of credit to MSME sector and address
their fi nancial needs. The licensing of 10 SFBs with a
mandate to have 50 per cent of their loans to be of
the ticket size of `25 lakhs and priority sector lending
(PSL) target of 75 per cent. The Credit Guarantee Fund
Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), the
specifi c instructions for dealing with stressed assets
of MSME sector, Trade Receivables Discounting
System (TReDs), etc., are all part of the ‘MSME
Finance’ friendly ecosystem that I referred to.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I will close it here. As I
began, fi nancial stability is diffi cult to defi ne. In an
integrated economy, it is diffi cult to determine any one
source of fi nancial instability. After the global crisis,
the standard setting bodies moved towards creating a
strong fi nancial system in general and banking system
in particular. Since the fi nancial system in India is
dominated by banks, I have focussed on the global
regulatory framework for banking system in general

SPEECH

12 RBI Bulletin January 2018
Regulation and Financial Stability

and how we have implemented it in India. A strong
banking system will have the resilience to withstand
financial instability arising from other channels.
Moreover, the banks need to be strong so that they
themselves are not the source of fi nancial instability.
The regulations provide the banking system with

antigens to keep them strong and resilient so that they
are not weak themselves and also are able to withstand
fi nancial instability arising from other parts of the
economy. We, in the Reserve Bank, always work towards
creating such a banking system through our regulatory
and supervisory framework.
Thank you.