SPEECH
RBI Bulletin July 2019 13
Development of Viable Capital Markets – The Indian Experience
1.3 The CGFS Report identified the drivers of capital 
market development and categorised them into two 
types:
i. drivers which create an enabling 
environment for financial development, and
ii. drivers which are more capital market 
specific.
1.4 Drivers which create an enabling environment as 
identified in the CGFS Report include:
	 •	 macroeconomic stability,
	 •	 broad respect for market autonomy,
	 •	 fair and efficient legal and judicial systems, 
and
	 •	 an efficient regulatory regime that creates 
conditions favourable for financial contracts.
1.5 Drivers which are capital market specific as 
identified in the CGFS Report include:
	 •	 easy access to high-quality material 
information,
	 •	 diversity in the investor base,
	 •	 efficient market ecosystem for trading and 
robust market infrastructures,
	 •	 openness towards international investors 
while maintaining macro-economic stability, 
and
	 •	 markets for hedging and funding securities.
1.6 The CGFS Report made six broad policy 
recommendations:
i. promoting greater market autonomy;
ii. strengthening legal and judicial systems for 
investor protection;
iii. enhancing regulatory independence and 
effectiveness;
iv. increasing the depth and diversity of the 
domestic institutional investor base;
1. Introduction
1.1 Capital markets play a crucial role in the economic 
development of a country. They provide financial 
resources required for the long-term sustainable 
development of the economy. Development of viable 
capital markets is therefore considered an important 
element in the macro-financial policy toolkit, 
including for objectives such as financial stability and 
the transmission of monetary policy.
1.2 The Committee on Global Financial System 
(CGFS), which meets at the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS), constituted a Working Group 
in 2018-19 to examine global trends in capital 
market development, identify various factors (legal, 
institutional, structural and conjunctural) that foster 
the development of robust capital markets, and consider 
the role of policy including prudential measures. The 
Working Group, co-chaired by the People’s Bank of 
China (PBOC, Dr. Li Bo) and the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI, Dr. Viral V. Acharya), focussed on issues primarily 
related to the development of markets in bond and 
equity securities1
. While these issues are arguably 
of greater relevance to emerging market economies, 
they were found to be of significant interest even for 
advanced economies.
*Dr Viral V. Acharya, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Indian 
School of Business, Hyderabad on June 29, 2019. These remarks collectively
summarise the presentations made earlier at the RBI symposium on
Establishing Viable Capital Markets, 29 May 2019; the Institute for Indian
Economic Studies (IIES), Tokyo, Japan, 10 June 2019; the meeting with Foreign
Portfolio Investors, Tokyo, Japan, 11 June 2019; the National University of
Singapore (NUS) Asian Leaders in Financial Institutions (ALFI) Programme, 
Bengaluru, 20 June 2019, and Fireside Chat at the Indian School of Business, 
Hyderabad, 29 June 2019.
1The Report was delivered to the CGFS at the BIS meeting on 23 January 
2019 and is available at https://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs62.pdf
Development of Viable Capital
Markets – The Indian Experience*
Viral V. Acharya
14
v. opening up capital markets internationally 
in a bi-directional manner; and
vi. developing complementary markets for 
derivatives, repo transactions and securities 
lending.
1.7 Policy initiatives in India have been largely in 
sync with the findings and recommendations of the 
CGFS Report. I shall discuss these and future policy 
directions after providing a brief overview of the 
Indian capital markets. While the scope of the CGFS 
Report is the entire capital market, I will largely confine 
this speech to the markets regulated by the Reserve 
Bank, viz., interest rate markets and (to a lesser extent) 
foreign exchange markets.
2. Overview of the Indian capital markets
2.1 Indian capital markets have a history of more than 
a century. However, they remained largely inactive 
till the 1970s. Partial liberalisation of the economy 
and pro-capital market policies during the 1980s 
infused some life into the markets, but it was only 
the economic liberalisation of the 1990s that provided 
a lasting impetus. Today, segments of India’s capital 
markets are comparable with counterparts in many of 
the advanced economies in terms of efficiency (price 
discovery), tradability (low impact cost), resilience (comovement of rates across product classes and yield 
curves), and stability. In particular, their ability to 
withstand several periods of stress, notably the Asian 
financial crisis in 1997-98, the global financial crisis in 
2007-09 and the ‘taper tantrum’ episode in 2013, is a 
sign of their increasing maturity.
2.2 In terms of size, all the major segments of the 
capital market, viz., Central Government securities 
(G-Sec) market, market for State Development Loans 
(SDL), corporate bond market and equity market – the 
so called ‘cash markets’ – have experienced consistent 
growth during the past few decades in terms of 
primary issuance, market capitalisation (for equity 
market) and trading volumes in the secondary market. 
Equity market remains the largest segment, even as 
G-Sec, SDL and corporate bond markets have grown 
steadily (Chart 1).
2.3 Growth of the Government Securities market:
A streamlined, transparent and market-based primary 
issuance process has underpinned the development 
of the government securities markets, both central 
government securities (G-Secs) and state government 
securities (SDLs). In the primary G-Sec market, 
issuances are made as per a half-yearly pre-announced 
calendar. The calendar specifies the amount, tenor 
and issuance dates. The tenor of the G-Secs goes up 
to 40 years. G-Secs are mostly fixed-coupon bonds, 
although instruments such as inflation-linked bonds, 
capital-indexed bonds, floating-rate bonds and bonds 
with embedded options are also issued. Currently, all 
issuances are done through weekly auctions. Issuances 
are supported by Primary Dealers (PDs) who fully 
underwrite the issue. Auctions are conducted through 
both competitive bidding [for all residents, Foreign 
Portfolio Investors (FPIs) and Non-Resident Indians 
(NRIs)], which determines the market-clearing price, 
and non-competitive bidding (for retail investors, 
largely), which receives the allotted securities at the 
SPEECH
RBI Bulletin July 2019 15
Development of Viable Capital Markets – The Indian Experience
market-clearing price. More than 90 per cent of the 
issuances are done through re-opening of existing 
securities which has contributed significantly to 
market liquidity by spreading out ownership across 
a large number of investors. The Reserve Bank has 
also introduced ‘when-issued’ segment for the G-Sec 
market since 20062
.
The profile of both G-Secs and SDLs in terms 
of stock and flow characteristics is shown in Tables
1 and 2. The weighted average coupon on G-Secs has 
remained stable across interest rate cycles imparting 
stability to the debt profile as the average maturity of 
issuance (more than 10 years) is one of the longest 
globally, helping limit the rollover risk for the central 
government. SDL issuance has increasingly formed a 
much greater share of issuance relative to the G-Secs, 
rising from around 25 per cent of issuance in 2013-14 
to around 45 per cent in 2017-18.
2.4 Liquidity of the G-Sec Market: Liquidity in 
the secondary market for government securities has 
noticeably improved over the past decade (Chart 2). 
The average daily volume in the G-Sec and SDL markets 
has remained higher than that of corporate bond 
and equity cash markets. The liquidity in G-Secs is, 
however, mainly concentrated in a few benchmark 
securities, particularly the 10-year benchmark, and 
SDLs are relatively less liquid than the G-Secs, yielding 
typically 50-75 basis points more than the G-Secs in 
terms of yield at the 10-year tenor. The average bidTable 2: Issuance profile of Government Borrowings 
(in US $ billion)
Year Central Government 
(G-Secs)
State Governments 
(SDLs)
Gross 
Issuance
Outstanding 
Stock 
(end-March)
Gross 
Issuance
Outstanding 
Stock
(end-March)
2013-14 90 609 31 174
2014-15 91 648 36 199
2015-16 85 674 41 243
2016-17 80 754 56 321
2017-18 91 795 63 346
2018-19 83 837 70 404
Source: Database of Indian Economy (DBIE), Reserve Bank of India
Table 1: Characteristics of Central Government 
Borrowings (G-Secs)
Year Issued during the Year Outstanding stock
Weighted 
Average 
Yield 
(per cent )
Weighted 
Average 
Maturity 
(years)
Weighted 
Average 
Coupon 
(per cent )
Weighted 
Average 
Maturity 
(years)
2013-14 8.4 14.2 8.0 10.0
2014-15 8.5 14.7 8.1 10.2
2015-16 7.9 16.0 8.1 10.5
2016-17 7.2 14.8 8.0 10.7
2017-18 7.0 15.0 8.0 10.7
2018-19 7.8 14.7 7.8 10.4
Source: Annual Report of Reserve Bank of India (2017-18) and Database of 
Indian Economy (DBIE), Reserve Bank of India.
2‘When Issued’, a short form of ‹when, as and if issued ‹, indicates a conditional transaction in a security authorized for issuance but not as yet actually 
issued. All ‘when issued’ transactions are on an ‘if’ basis, to be settled if and when the actual security is issued. Such trading facilitates the distribution 
process for Government securities by stretching the actual distribution period for each issue and allowing the market more time to absorb large issues 
without disruption.
16
ask spread for liquid securities in the G-Sec market has 
remained less than a basis point during the last few 
years (Chart 3). Strikingly, bid-ask spread as well as 
the price impact of trade for the 10 year Indian G-Sec 
benchmark are comparable to or lower than those for 
most of the advanced economies of the world including 
the US, the UK, France and Germany (Chart 4).
There are several proximate drivers of this 
liquidity of the Indian G-Sec market:
i. Regular issuance of the 10-year benchmark 
has concentrated trading interest in this 
segment of the yield curve. Efforts are 
now being made to regularise issuance of 
benchmark securities at shorter maturities 
(2 and 5 years).
ii. Secondary market transactions are 
predominantly (around 80 per cent) 
conducted in an anonymous electronic 
order matching system (NDS-OM) which is 
unique in the world for debt trading. While 
the remaining transactions happen over-thecounter (OTC) outside the NDS-OM3
, they 
are nevertheless reported to the NDS-OM 
platform.
iii. Near real-time dissemination of trade 
information publicly accessible on the 
website of the Clearing Corporation of India 
Limited (CCIL) ensures price transparency.
iv. Settlement is guaranteed by the CCIL 
and takes place through Delivery versus 
3 Negotiated Dealing System-Order Matching.
SPEECH
RBI Bulletin July 2019 17
Development of Viable Capital Markets – The Indian Experience
Payment (DvP) mechanism on T+1 basis. 
Guaranteed settlement implies there is no 
risk to investors from each other of delivery 
failures.
(v) Finally, enabling of short-selling facilitates a 
two-way interest adding to activity and price 
discovery in the market.
2.5 Growth and liquidity of the corporate bond 
market: The corporate bond market has grown over 
the years to a size of US$ 447 billion of outstanding 
stock as at the end of March 2019, clocking an 
annualised growth rate of 13.5 per cent during the 
last four years. Issuances are predominantly through 
private placement and dominated by high credit 
issuers. In 2018-19, 79 per cent of the issuances were by 
entities rated ‘A’ or higher. Secondary market trading 
has also picked up in the recent past, with trading 
volumes rising from US$ 170 billion in financial year 
(FY) 2014-15 to US$ 267 billion in 2018-19. Trading 
is entirely OTC with trades settled bilaterally and 
reported to stock exchanges.
2.6 Recent developments in the corporate bond 
market: Consistent investment interest by domestic 
institutions like mutual funds, pension funds and 
insurance funds as well as foreign portfolio investors 
(FPIs) has helped in developing the corporate bond 
market. Tri-party repo (‘sale and repurchase’) in 
corporate bonds has been introduced by the exchanges 
recently with a view to encourage trading interest. 
Implementation of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code (IBC) starting December 2016 is expected to go 
a long way in improving participation in the corporate 
bond market by strengthening the protection of 
creditor rights, in a market presently characterised 
by one of the lowest recovery rates (25 per cent) in 
the world (Chart 5). With greater confidence in timebound and efficient resolutions under the IBC, foreign 
investors are likely to explore investment in subinvestment grade and distressed corporate assets.
2.7 Investor Base: There has been a conscious and 
continuous effort by the Reserve Bank to expand the 
investor base and thereby liquidity of the markets it 
regulates, while preserving financial stability. The 
investor base for G-Secs, for instance, has expanded 
over the past decade in terms of an increase in the 
share of holdings by insurance companies and 
corporates and a corresponding decrease in the share 
18
of holding by commercial banks (Chart 6). In parallel, 
calibrated access for global investors through the FPI 
route is helping broaden the investor base, while also 
bringing in diversity of trading views and strategies.
2.8 Funding and Derivatives Markets: A necessary 
condition for the development of capital markets 
is the existence of funding and securities lending 
markets as well as derivative markets for risk transfer. 
Repo funding in Indian G-Secs is fairly deep with 
average daily volume of about US$ 20 billion (Chart 7). 
In case of interest rate derivatives, there is reasonable 
liquidity in Interest Rate Futures (IRF) and Overnight 
4 Triparty repo in G-Secs went live on November 05, 2018. In tri-party repo, a third party acts as a central counterparty between the two originating parties 
of a repo transaction. Currently, the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) acts as the ‘triparty agent’ for the G-Secs, while the Bombay Stock Exchange 
(BSE) and the National Stock Exchange (NSE) operate as triparty agents for corporate bonds.
SPEECH
RBI Bulletin July 2019 19
Development of Viable Capital Markets – The Indian Experience
Indexed Swaps (OIS) markets5
. Much of the recent 
increase in activity can be attributed to the Reserve 
Bank allowing non-residents to participate in interest 
rate derivatives markets for both hedging and trading 
purposes.
3. Policy initiatives in India
What has enabled the growth of Indian capital 
markets to reach this stage? To answer this, I will now 
discuss the policy measures taken in India vis-à-vis the 
findings and recommendations of the CGFS Report.
3.1 Enabling environment
3.1.1 Macroeconomic Stability
India’s GDP growth has been one of the highest 
among large economies during the last decade and 
half (Chart 8). Double digit inflation of few years 
prior to the ‘taper tantrum’ episode has been tamed, 
facilitated by a shift by the Reserve Bank in 2016 to 
flexible inflation targeting with a headline target of 
4 per cent (+/- 2 per cent) for the Monetary Policy 
Committee (MPC). High levels of inflation make 
holdings of financial assets economically unattractive 
relative to non-financial assets such as housing 
and gold. The important reform of flexible inflation 
targeting, helped by low oil prices and food supply 
management, has kept the headline inflation under 
control during the last 5 years, relative to the MPC’s 
mandated target (Chart 9). This way, two preconditions 
of macroeconomic stability – stable growth and low 
inflation – necessary for financialisation of savings 
and capital market development are now in place in 
India.
3.1.2 Promoting market autonomy
a. Rationalising regulatory guidelines and 
procedures
 In active coordination with the government 
and other financial market regulators, the 
Reserve Bank has undertaken a series of reforms 
and rationalisation of existing policies. These 
measures also seek to ensure financial stability 
and instil confidence among stakeholders. Some 
important examples include:
i. Liberalising the process for innovation of 
new products;
ii. Moving away from a prescriptive approach 
to a principle-based regulatory approach;
5 An Overnight Index Swap (OIS) is an interest rate swap agreement where 
a fixed rate is swapped against a pre-determined published index of a daily 
overnight reference rate for an agreed period.