Prompt Corrective Action: An
Essential Element of Financial
Stability Framework*
Viral V. Acharya

SPEECH

2 RBI Bulletin November 2018
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework

Another significant step has been taken by the
Reserve Bank of India in parallel which has been
somewhat under-appreciated, viz., the imposition
of Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) on a number of
banks whose capital, asset quality and/or profitability
do not meet pre-specified thresholds. Today, I wish to
explain why PCA is an essential element of the Reserve
Bank’s (and more generally, of a banking supervisor’s)
financial stability framework.
Loss-absorption Role of Bank Capital
Before I discuss the Prompt Corrective Action
approach, it would be useful to briefly talk about the
critical role of bank capital in relation to the process of
resolution of stressed banks.
In its simplest form, a bank balance-sheet has
assets on the left hand side of the balance-sheet, and
liabilities on the right hand side in the form of equity
capital and deposits (and other forms of debt liabilities
such as unsecured bonds, and wholesale finance such
as inter-bank liabilities or short-term commercial
paper).
Equity capital is the primary loss-absorption
buffer – means of protection – against the asset losses
of a bank. It is meant to be at levels high enough to
absorb unanticipated losses with enough margin so as
to inspire confidence and enable the bank to continue
as a going concern, in particular, without passing on
losses to bank creditors. Once the capital level is fully
consumed by the deteriorating financials, it exposes
the unsecured creditors, including depositors, to bear
the losses. While the deposits typically are insured up
to a certain level, economic history shows that more
often than not the ultimate costs of paying off all
deposits fall on the sovereign, especially in the case of
large, complex and inter-connected banks.
Capital constraints at a wider, systemic level
also impact the resolution of weak banks. The United
States experience, empirically documented by Granja,
Matvos and Seru (2017), shows that an optimal bidding

strategy of a healthier bank – a potential acquirer,
which may value the weaker bank for its franchise
value from deposits, gets adversely impacted if it is
itself poorly capitalised. In such a scenario, the overall
value realisation for the weak bank goes down. The
poor capitalisation of potential acquirers can also drive
a wedge between their willingness and ability to pay
for a failed bank. In this manner, bank capital being at
healthy levels also has a system-wide loss-absorption
role by helping sell weak banks to healthy ones in an
efficient manner.
Given this criticality of bank capital in absorbing
losses, it is natural why minimum bank capital
requirements are in place globally and why capital
becomes one of the most important factors for
supervisors to monitor. In the aftermath of the global
financial crisis, there has been a complete overhaul
of the international regime for minimum regulatory
capital requirements of banks, as enshrined in the
revised Basel norms, viz., Basel-III.
The goal of Basel III is to raise the quality,
consistency and transparency of the capital base
of banks to withstand unanticipated losses and to
strengthen the overall risk coverage of the capital
framework. In addition to revising the minimum
capital ratio requirements for credit risk, Basel III
also introduced a capital conservation buffer (CCB)
and a countercyclical capital buffer. CCB is designed
to ensure that banks build up a capital buffer outside
periods of financial stress that can be drawn down
when banks face financial (systemic or idiosyncratic)
stress. Banks which draw down their capital
conservation buffer during a stressed period are
required to have a definite plan to replenish the buffer
and face capital distribution constraints. The objective
of the countercyclical capital buffer is to use capital
as a macro-prudential instrument aimed at protecting
the banking sector from periods of excess aggregate
credit growth, that have often been associated with
the build-up of system-wide risk.

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin November 2018 3
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework
In this regard, it is instructive to note that the
minimum bank capital ratio (to suitably risk-weighted
assets) required to be held under the Basel norms is only
a floor. Since the global financial crisis, many countries
require their banks to hold capital at higher levels, as
shown below. Further, in other major jurisdictions like
the US and the UK, effective capital requirements tend
to be even higher on account of several add-ons; for
instance, in the US, higher leverage ratio (put simply,
bank capital to unweighted assets ratio) and the
stress tests – annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis
and Review (CCAR) – also push up the effective
capital requirements beyond Basel requirements for
systemically important and/or large banks.
While this view of bank capital focuses on its
benefits in the form of loss-absorption adequacy at
individual bank and systemic level, there is an equally
important incentive role played by bank capital that is
worthy of discussion.
Incentive Role of Bank Capital
Let me now explain why it becomes imperative
for bank supervisors to intervene in a weak bank much
before the capital is completely eroded. Conceptually,
there are at least two reasons why the world over

banks that make losses to the point of being under-
capitalised do not recapitalise, or are not recapitalised,

promptly.

First, while private banks typically hold greater
capital than required by regulatory requirements,
shareholders are reluctant to inject capital once the
capital is eroded by losses as it gets primarily deployed
in stabilising bank liabilities. To compensate for this
wealth transfer for injecting capital, shareholders
require a much higher rate of return than when banks
are better capitalised, but such high required returns
may render banking activity unprofitable to pursue.
This is the well-known ‘debt overhang’ problem,
studied extensively in financial economics (Myers,
1977).
Secondly, when banks become under-capitalised
en masse or are government-owned to start with, it
is often thought that recapitalisation should occur
swiftly given the attendant real and systemic risk costs
of not recapitalising banks – costs that a government
should internalise. In practice, however, banking
sectors are sometimes ‘too big to save’ relative to the
size of government balance-sheets. Even when that is
not so, governments may themselves be financially
constrained: bank recapitalisations must earn effective
returns that exceed the costs of raising additional
finance (usually additional borrowings) or from
cutting back on other fiscal expenditures. Hence, it

is quite common, even for government-owned under-
capitalised banks to take a while to get adequately

recapitalised, if at all.

Jurisdictions Minimum Common
Equity Ratio

Minimum Tier 1 Capital
Ratio Minimum Total Capital Ratio
Basel III Prescriptions 4.5 6.0 8.0
Brazil 11 from 2013, gradually aligning to Basel III by
2019 – subsequently as per Basel
China 5.0 6.0 8.0
India 5.5 7.0 9.0
Mexico (CCB is integrated into minimum
requirements) 7.0 8.5 10.5
Singapore 6.5 8.0 10.0
South Africa 5.0 6.75 9.0
Switzerland 4.5 to 10.0 6.0 to 13.0 8.0 to 19.0
Turkey 4.5 6.0 12.0
Source: Regulatory Consistency Assessment Programme (RCAP) reports of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS)

SPEECH

4 RBI Bulletin November 2018
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework

Regardless of the reason for the under-
capitalisation of banks to persist, what is observed is

that creditors of under-capitalised banks are not only
offered off-balance sheet government guarantees,
notably deposit insurance, but also implicit guarantees
to uninsured creditors. This is done in the interest
of financial stability and safeguarding of payment
and settlement systems, but carries the downside
that under-capitalised banks often continue to access
credit markets at artificially low costs of borrowing.
Consequently, without appropriate supervisory
constraints in place, such banks are in a position to

delay the recognition of losses and engage in ever-
greening or zombie lending, which is essentially the

rolling over of debts of unviable borrowers that would
have otherwise defaulted.
In fact, this was precisely what happened in Japan

at the turn of the last century when the problem of non-
performing loans and bank capital shortage persisted

for over a decade. Hoshi and Kashyap (2010) attribute
this to two factors: first, banks not recognising the
true losses on NPAs, thereby overstating the quality
of their loans; and, second, prevalence of zombie
lending by under-capitalised banks. It was only
after the implementation of the of Financial Revival
Program (Takenaka Plan) starting in 2003, involving
more rigorous evaluation of bank assets, increasing
of bank capital, and strengthening of governance for
recapitalised banks, that the Japanese banks finally
stopped the process of ever-greening non-performing
loans and started to accumulate capital through
retained earnings over the next five years.
In addition to the above evidence on Japan
which I covered in some detail in the 8th R K Talwar
Memorial Lecture, my recent joint work with Sascha
Steffen and Lea Steinruecke, titled ‘Kicking the Can
Down the Road: Government Interventions in the
European Banking Sector,’ examined all government
interventions in the Eurozone banking sector during
the 2007 to 2009 financial crisis. In particular, we

analysed the implications of these interventions in the
European banking sector for the subsequent sovereign
debt crisis and found that:
i. Governments with weaker public finances
were more reluctant to recapitalise
distressed banks during the financial crisis;
and,
ii. The resulting insufficient recapitalisation
of distressed banks had significant negative
consequences for the efficiency of real sector
lending. In particular, weak banks remained
vulnerable to future shocks and increased
their risk-taking. Furthermore, these banks
did not write down defaulted loans but
instead ever-greened loans to zombie
borrowers, crowding out in the process
credit extension to healthier borrowers.
The Case for Regulatory Prompt Corrective Action
How should under-capitalised banks, and more
generally, banks whose asset quality and profitability
make them vulnerable to further stress, be dealt with,
taking cognizance of the reality that the strength of
market discipline by bank creditors is blunted by
the presence of explicit and implicit government
guarantees?
This question received significant academic and
policy-maker attention in the United States following

the Savings & Loans (S&L) crisis, in which by mid-
1980’s, so many thrifts had to be resolved at such low

levels of capitalisation that in the end a significant
government bailout in the form of blanket deposit
insurance had to be engineered. Effectively, it had
been left until too late to exercise regulatory discipline
that could have substituted for the lack of adequate
market discipline; as a result, the authorities had to
engage in excessive forbearance and full-scale bailout.
Key insight that emerged from the debate around
the S&L crisis was that the banking regulator needed to
adopt a ‘structured early intervention and resolution’

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin November 2018 5
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework
(SEIR) approach (see, for instance, Benston and
Kaufman, 1990, and White, 1991). This insight, in turn,
led to the passage of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC) Improvement Act (FDICIA), 1991,
and, thus, was born the Prompt Corrective Action
(PCA) framework of the FDIC as modern banking has
witnessed. [Another twin born then was risk-based
deposit insurance premium!]
Prompt Corrective Action frameworks adopt the
core principles of structured early intervention and
resolution in the following manner:
i. Thresholds of performance (in case of FDIC,
bank capitalisation) are identified to classify
banks that breach the thresholds into
categories, for instance, in the case of FDIC

into ‘under-capitalised’, ‘significantly under-
capitalised’ and ‘critically under-capitalised’.

The first thresholds are set at levels that are
well above what would allow for an effective
resolution or revival of banks.
ii. Banks that do not meet the thresholds
are subjected to a layered, progressively
stringent ‘program’, consisting of mandatory
and discretionary regulatory actions, which
aim to prevent further haemorrhaging,
effectively quarantining the banks in
breach until they are resolved. Another
important rationale is to help supervisors
enforce corrective measures in a rule-based
manner and this way reduce the risk of
forbearance.
Put simply, this is what Prompt Corrective Action
(or PCA) is intended to achieve – to intervene early and
take corrective measures in a timely manner, so as to
restore the financial health of banks that are at risk by
limiting deterioration in their health and preserving
their capital levels. By construction then, PCA involves
some restrictions on bank scope and expansion as
not doing so would lead to excessive risks on the

balance-sheets of these banks. Similarly, putting up
PCA banks for sale in the market and / or replacing
bank management become potential mechanisms for
prompt resolution. It follows as a corollary that the
strength of the PCA framework depends crucially on
the extent of regulatory powers that can be exercised
by the banking regulator.
While the intent of PCA is primarily remedial,
it can also act as a deterrence and incentivise bank
management and shareholders to contain risks so they
do not end up in PCA in the first place. And, by the
virtue of being reasonably rule-based, PCA reduces the
scope for discretion; like Odysseus, bank regulators
tie themselves to the mast to evade the voices of the
forbearance sirens.
Reserve Bank’s Prompt Corrective Action (PCA)
Framework
The Reserve Bank’s PCA framework was
introduced in December 2002 as a structured early
intervention mechanism along the lines of the FDIC’s
PCA framework. Subsequently, the framework was
reviewed by the Reserve Bank keeping in view the
international best practices and recommendations
of the Working Group of the Financial Stability and
Development Council (FSDC) on Resolution Regimes
for Financial Institutions in India (January 2014) and
the Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission
(FSLRC, March 2013). The Revised PCA Framework
was issued by the Reserve Bank on April 13, 2017 and
implemented with respect to the bank financials as on
March 31, 2017.
Annex Ia provides the thresholds deployed under
the revised framework, publicly available at https://
www.rbi.org.in, linked to capital (CRAR – regulatory
capital to risk-weighted assets ratio – and Leverage
ratio), asset quality (NNPA – net non-performing assets
to advances ratio), and profitability (ROA – return on
assets). Under each measure, once the initial threshold
is crossed, successive thresholds are employed to

SPEECH

6 RBI Bulletin November 2018
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework

categorise banks into those violating Threshold 1
only, Threshold 1 and Threshold 2 only, or even
Threshold 3.
The revised PCA framework strengthened the
earlier one along several dimensions, the salient
changes being as follows:
i. While capital, asset quality and profitability
continue to be the key areas for monitoring
under the revised framework, common
equity Tier-1 (Common equity Tier 1 capital
to risk-weighted Assets) ratio has also been
included to constitute an additional trigger
along with monitoring of leverage. This
change acknowledges that it is common
equity capital of a bank that has the highest
loss-absorption capacity and is the least like
debt. Overall, risk thresholds under the
revised framework have been made more
granular.
ii. Some of the corrective actions which were
earlier a part of ‘structured (mandatory)
actions’ to be taken by the supervisor have
been moved to a more comprehensive menu
of ‘discretionary actions’ under the revised
framework (detailed comparison is in Annex
Ib). Thus, the scope of mandatory actions
across all risk thresholds has been restricted
essentially to:
a. Restriction on dividend distribution/

remittance of profits;

b. Requirement on promoters/owners/
parents to bring in more capital;
c. Restrictions on branch expansion;
d. Higher provisioning requirement; and,
e. Restrictions on management

compensation.
iii. While no restriction has been imposed on
the retail deposit-taking activity of any

bank till date, banks can be advised under
the revised framework as a cost reduction
measure to reduce or avoid altogether the
high-cost bulk deposits and instead improve
their Current Account and Saving Account
(CASA) deposit levels.
It is useful to compare this Revised PCA
Framework of the Reserve Bank to the PCA Framework
of the FDIC as an international benchmark.
Comparison with the FDIC’s PCA Framework
Details of various thresholds as well as the
mandatory and discretionary actions under the PCA
Framework of the FDIC are given in Annex II. In terms
of the conceptual design, both frameworks mirror the
core principles of structured early intervention and
resolution. However, there are at least three significant
differences:
i. While FDIC triggers the PCA based only on
bank capital thresholds, the Reserve Bank’s
PCA thresholds also include asset quality and
profitability. The rationale for this difference
is as follows. When provision coverage
ratio (provisions to gross non-performing
assets ratio) of banks is at international
standards as in the US, most anticipated
losses are already built into bank capital.
In other words, non-performing assets net
of provisions (NNPA ratio) is low. However,
the provision coverage ratio of Indian banks
has historically been much lower as we will
see below (Chart 8), in part due to their
maintaining only the minimum required
provisions. As a result, the present level
of bank capital masks the expected capital
write-offs that will occur in future; this risk
of future under-capitalisation is captured
by looking for below-threshold asset quality
(if NNPA ratio is high) and profitability (if

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin November 2018 7
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework
return on assets or ROA is low so that capital
accretion in future will be weak).
ii. The mandatory actions are much stricter and
triggered earlier in terms of capitalisation
levels in case of the FDIC. For instance,
restrictions on asset growth and prior
approval of certain expansion proposals
kick in right at the breach of Threshold-1
(‘under-capitalised’ category of FDIC’s PCA
bank classification).

iii. Beyond Threshold 2 (‘significantly under-
capitalised’), the mandatory actions by

FDIC may include recapitalisation, change
in management or even divestiture. Indeed,
most banks under FDIC’s PCA are resolved
through auctions where typical outcome
is a purchase by another bank with an
assumption of the PCA bank’s liabilities.
Powers to undertake such actions in
case of India’s public sector banks (PSBs)
lie with the Government of India. As
enunciated in Governor Patel’s speech in
March 2018, ‘Banking Regulatory Powers
Should Be Ownership Neutral,’ the Reserve
Bank lacks legislative powers to enforce
divestiture or change in management at
PSBs.
On balance, therefore, it can be concluded that
the RBI’s PCA Framework is less onerous as compared
to the FDIC’s PCA Framework.
Let me elaborate on the point (iii) above. Purchase
and Assumption (P&A) is the most commonly used
resolution method by the FDIC, as part of which
a healthy institution purchases some or all of
the assets of a failed bank and assumes some or all
of the liabilities. When deciding which of these
techniques to employ, the FDIC is guided legislatively
by the ‘least cost to the taxpayers’ requirement. The

FDIC seeks bids from qualified bidders for the failed
bank’s assets and the assumption of certain liabilities,
including deposits, and accepts the bid that is judged
least costly.
If no viable P&A buyer can be found, then the
FDIC typically deploys a deposit payoff. A deposit
payoff involves repaying insured depositors,
liquidating assets of the bank, and, dividing the
proceeds from asset liquidation between itself and
uninsured bank creditors. The FDIC might also use a
Deposit Insurance National Bank (DINB) or bridge
banks to resolve a failed bank, which entail
establishing a new national bank with a short-period
charter from the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency (OCC). The FDIC retains the majority of the
assets in its corporate capacity as the receiver and
eventually sells them.
In India, merger of weak banks with stronger
ones has been the primary mode of resolution of weak
banks in the past. Section 45 of the Banking Regulation
Act 1949 empowers the Reserve Bank to make a scheme
of amalgamation of a bank with another bank if it is
in the depositors’ interest or in the interest of overall
banking system. The operation of the weak bank may
be kept under moratorium for a certain period of time
to ensure smooth implementation of the scheme.
Many private sector banks have been merged with
other private sector banks or the PSBs under this
mechanism. Since the onset of reforms in 1991, there
were 22 mergers in the Indian banking space till 2010,
11 of which were compulsory mergers under Section 45
of the BR Act, 1949 (Bishnoi and Devi, 2015). However,
one of the critical preconditions for this approach
to succeed is that a substantial part of the banking
sector be well-capitalised. If the potential acquirers
are poorly capitalised, it may result in inefficiencies in
prices as well as timing in resolution of weak banks,
besides increasing the risk of weakening the acquirers
themselves through such acquisitions.

SPEECH

8 RBI Bulletin November 2018
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework

Performance of the PCA banks in India
Let me now turn to some data. The goal of the
exercise will be to help understand the ten-year
performance (wherever data is available) of banks
on which the Reserve Bank has imposed the PCA.
The reason for examining the performance of these
banks over a long time period is to appreciate the
fact that the progress of banks under PCA cannot be
judged over a relatively short time scale. The longer
the under-capitalisation and asset quality problems
have festered, the more patient one has to be during
the rehabilitation process. There is no quick fix or
overnight silver bullet here; the reforms have to be
implemented and allowed to run their course; they
can’t be chopped or diluted mid-stream; the focus has
to be on stability that is durable.
As I explain below, there are emerging signs that
the performance of banks under PCA is slowly but
steadily being restored.
Presently, there are twelve banks, eleven in the
public sector and one in the private sector, under the
Reserve Bank’s Revised PCA Framework, with PCA
having been imposed on them between February 2014
and January 2018. I will focus below only on the eleven

PSBs under the PCA. The share of these PCA banks in
advances and deposits as on March 31, 2018 was 18.5
per cent and 20.8 per cent, respectively.
The following trends emerge as one tracks the
performance of these banks in terms of capitalisation
and asset quality:
(i) Capitalisation (Charts 1, 2): The declining
trend of CRAR and Tier-1 capital ratio for PCA banks
that started in 2011 has been arrested and the ratio
has been maintained steady since 2014 at or above
internationally prescribed levels. It may, however,
be noted that the PCA banks have had lower CRAR
and Tier-1 capital ratios compared to non-PCA banks
(barring 2011), and especially private banks (right
since 2009).
(ii) Asset quality (Charts 3, 4, 5): Both the gross
and net NPA ratios of PCA banks mirrored those of
non-PCA banks up until about 2014. However, post
the Asset Quality Review (AQR) exercise, the NPA
recognition at PCA banks has led to a sharper rise in
both gross and net NPAs, relative to non-PCA banks,
and especially relative to private banks. This does not
mean that AQR caused the NPAs; it simply induced
the long-overdue recognition of NPAs. Notably, the

Chart 1: Capital to Risk-weighted
Assets Ratio (CRAR)*

PSBs - PCA PSBs - Non-PCA Pvt Banks
Per cent

* T: - otal Capital/Risk weighted Assets.
Source: Reserve Bank of India.

10.58
12.04
16.43

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

8.05
9.77
14.24

4
6
8
10
12
14
16

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Chart 2: Tier 1 Capital Ratio*

PSBs - PCA PSBs - Non-PCA Pvt Banks
Per cent

* T: . ier 1 Capital /Risk Weighted Assets
Source: Reserve Bank of India.

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin November 2018 9
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework

stressed assets ratio, which besides NPAs includes
the Restructured Standard assets (that enjoyed the
regulatory forbearance under the earlier guidelines),
reveals that the underlying asset quality at PCA banks

was deteriorating at a sharper pace compared to non-
PCA banks right since 2011, which is now accepted as

the time by which the lending boom of 2009-10 began
to unravel.

The Tide is Turning for the PCA Banks...
As I have tried to explain, an important objective
of the PCA is to first and foremost limit further losses
and prevent erosion of bank capital, creating a platform
of stability for the bank, and in turn, setting the stage
for structural interventions to be implemented and
pushed through.
In assessing whether this objective is being
attained, three observations are in order:
(i) Recapitalisation (Chart 6): The Government
of India has infused more than `2,300 billion in public
sector banks since 2005, more than half of which has
gone into banks currently under PCA. Within PCA
banks, almost half of the total infusion (i.e., `635
billion) has occurred during FY2018 and FY2019,
after the banks were classified under PCA. This
recapitalisation has been an important contributor to
financial stability of these banks and of the rest of the
banking system they deal with.
(ii) Preventing Further Deterioration (Chart
7): In spite of their worse capitalisation and stressed
assets ratio compared to other banks, PCA banks had
credit growth that was as strong as that of other banks
21.69

12.92

5.07

0
5
10
15
20
25

March 2008
March 2009
March 2010
March 2011
March 2012
March 2013
March 2014
March 2015
March 2016
March 2017
March 2018
Chart 5: Stressed Assets Ratio*

PSBs - PCA PSBs - Non-PCA Pvt Banks
Per cent

* ( : . Gross NPAs + Restructured Standard Advances) / Gross Advances
Source: Reserve Bank of India.

SPEECH

10 RBI Bulletin November 2018
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework

up until 2014. However, since the AQR exercise and
the imposition of PCA, the year on year growth in
advances for PCA banks has declined from over 10
per cent in 2014 to below zero (contraction) by 2016
and remained in the contraction zone since. Given the
evidence presented above on PCA banks’ sustained
problem of asset quality (Charts 3, 4 and 5), this is
indeed the required medicine to prevent further
hemorrhaging of their balance-sheets.
(iii) Improvement in Provision Coverage
Ratio (Chart 8): Given the recapitalisation and
prevention of further haemorrhaging, the provision
coverage ratio (PCR) of PCA banks which had fallen
off relative to that of other banks starting 2011 and
reached below 40 per cent during 2012-2016, has now
recovered to that of non-PCA PSBs. The recovered level
of PCR remains at present at around 50 per cent, which
is more 10 per cent below that of private banks, and
away from the desirable 70 per cent. These numbers
suggest that the loss-absorption capacity of PCA banks
is on the mend, but that there is some distance to go
in their catch-up to healthy levels.
There is an assertion being made in some circles
that imposition of the PCA has starved the Indian

economy of credit. There is little factual basis for
this assertion, either for the overall economy or at
sectoral level. While it is true as shown above that
PCA banks are experiencing lending contraction on
average (in terms of their year on year growth in
overall advances), the nominal non-food credit growth
of scheduled commercial banks has been close to or
above double-digit levels, for past several quarters,

Chart 6: Capital Infusion by Government of

India in PSBs

PSBs - PCA PSBs - Non-PCA
Source: Reserve Bank of India.

542

358

` billion
100
200
300
400
500
600

2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18

SPEECH

RBI Bulletin November 2018 11
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework

and with a robust distribution across the sectors of
the real economy (Chart 9). This is because the
reduction in lending at PCA banks is being more
than offset by credit growth at healthier banks. This
is indeed what one wants – efficient reallocation of
credit for the real economy with a financially stable
distribution of risks across bank balance-sheets.
Indeed, the funding for the economy as a whole has
become diversified over this period, also due to the
growth of capital markets.
There is also a call for more lending by PCA banks
to large industries where the overall credit growth
remains muted. Note that many of these industries are
heavily indebted to start with and are going through a
deleveraging process under the IBC (so that at present,
their sectoral capacity is still somewhat in excess and
credit demand itself weak). The key point is that PCA
banks are de-risking the asset side of their balance
sheets by moving away from riskier sector loans to
less riskier ones and government securities; the first
and foremost priority is to limit (effectively, taxpayer)
losses at PCA banks and prevent further erosion of
their capital.

Conclusion
Let me conclude.
I have tried to explain why adequate bank
capital is critical to fortify bank balance-sheets and
a key indicator for the bank supervisors to closely
monitor; and, how the Prompt Corrective Action
(PCA) framework is employed internationally by bank
supervisors and regulators as an accepted form of
structured early intervention and resolution, designed
to help banks regain health by preserving capital.
I then briefly explained the primary features
of the Reserve Bank’s PCA framework, which is an
essential element of its apparatus for safeguarding
overall financial stability.
The evidence I presented suggests that without
the PCA imposition, some banks would have incurred
even higher losses and required even more of taxpayer
money for recapitalisation. Imposition of PCA can,
thus, be seen as first, stabilising the banks at risk, and
then, undertaking the deeper bank reforms needed
for long-term viability of the business model of these
banks.

SPEECH

12 RBI Bulletin November 2018
Prompt Corrective Action: An Essential Element of
Financial Stability Framework

It is important, therefore, that the PCA framework
to deal with financially weak banks is persisted with.
Any slackening of the approach in the midst of required
course action is an all too familiar and ultimately
harmful habit that we must eschew.
Well begun is only half done, as they say!